# Fear and anxiety as a source of many problems {#fear-and-anxiety-as-a-source-of-many-problems}

As parents who are trying our best to do a good job, we don’t realize that it’s precisely our fears for our children, which we think of as concern, that are the problem with most parenting. These fears often take the form of intense anxiety with regard to our children. Whatever its precise manifestation, our fears undermine so many of our good intentions. Fear is the reason our parenting somehow manages to produce results that are the exact opposite of what we were aiming for.

**Our children may be small and powerless in terms of living independent lives, but they are mighty in their potential to be our awakeners.**

Perhaps more than anything, becoming a parent offers us the opportunity to become aware of patterns established in childhood. Because of our children’s closeness to us, they offer us a mirror of ourselves. Through them, we are brought face-to-face with what it must have felt like for us to be a child. 

Instead of reacting to our children because of what they are showing us about ourselves, the conscious response is to look into the mirror they are holding up to us, allowing ourselves to become aware of the many ways in which we still behave like children ourselves not in control of our own emotions.

The reason neither traditional (it’s the child’s fault) nor contemporary (be calm and understanding) responses to children’s provocations are effective for long is that they don’t get to the root of the behavior. The focus of the various techniques parents read about or pick up from experts or other parents is on the particular behavior, not on the dynamics that underlie the behavior. These techniques are all about controlling children so their actions don’t trigger us. We tell ourselves that if we could just get the child to “do” or “not do” certain things, we wouldn’t react the way we do. It’s a game in which both parent and child are always trying to stay one step ahead of the other. Needless to say, the game results in anger, anxiety, and frequently disappointment and even sadness.