## Welcome friction and disagreement {#welcome-friction-and-disagreement}

Conflict is a common occurrence in any creative process. It is a good sign, a powerful opportunity to refine your ideas and processes. Despite the frustration that friction causes, it will serve you in the long run if you are able to manage it. The leaders of great creative teams value the friction that results when opinions vary among a passionate group of creative minds. If good chemistry has been cultivated, teams can use disagreements to foster valuable insights that would otherwise be inaccessible. Yet despite the opportunities that conflict provides, our tendency is to shy away from it. We will often completely disengage when a creative process becomes heated. Conflict happens very easily. For any problem, there are multiple possible solutions —some better than others. In a diverse team, there will be many different opinions. Fighting is uncomfortable, but consider the benefits of opposing perspectives duking it out. Imagine that the answer to a problem lies somewhere on a spectrum between A and B. The more arguing that takes place about both ends of the spectrum, the more likely it is that the complete terrain of possibilities will be adequately explored. By contrast, if the advocates for A just give up, then B becomes the default answer without any better solution being discovered in between.

**Some of the most admired creative teams share a common tenet—they are comfortable fighting out their disagreements and diverse points of view, but they always share conviction after the meeting. These teams recognize that the purpose of disagreement is to more fully explore the options. Fighting, as it turns out, is an asset for the teams that can stomach it. But the animosity is released when the exercise is over. Your team is more likely to conceive breakthroughs if its chemistry is strong enough to capitalize on conflict. Thoughtful leaders use conflict as an opportunity to align and strengthen their teams.**