# Our greatest strengths are our greatest weaknesses. {#our-greatest-strengths-are-our-greatest-weaknesses}

One theme that is played out in many marriages is the coming together of someone with strong obsessive characteristics (usually a man) with someone else who has a more impulsive and theatrical personality (usually a woman). These people are initially drawn to each other because of complementary needs. The man is in need of more entertainment in his life and he values the woman as less inhibited, more spontaneous than he. The woman sees the well-organized and meticulous man as promising a measure of restraint that will balance her impulsive tendencies. It’s easy to see why such a relationship often contains the seeds of disappointment and frustration. (He: “Why can’t you be more responsible?” She: “You just don’t know how to have fun.”)

People with compulsive character structures are vulnerable to depression, as is anyone who seeks perfection in an imperfect world. It is often puzzling to such people that approaches that make them successful in their work are so poorly received by those they live with. Obsessive people put a strong emphasis on control. Anything that threatens this sense of being in charge induces anxiety. This leads inevitably to efforts to reassert control, in effect redoubling the behaviors that produced the problem in the first place. The resultant conflict produces feelings of frustration and discouragement that further reinforce a sense of failure.

Practically any human characteristic—competitiveness, orderliness, even kindness—when indulged to an extreme can produce undesirable results. Perhaps this is just another argument for moderation in all things. But we need to acknowledge that those qualities of which we are most proud can prove our undoing.