# Physics

## Equilibrium

**Equilibrium** is defined as a state of balance between opposing
forces, powers, or influences. An equilibrium model typically identifies
a system that is at rest; this is called *static equilibrium*. When
competing forces are equally matched, a system reaches *dynamic
equilibrium*. A scale that is equally weighted on both sides is an
example of static equilibrium. Fill a bathtub full of water and then
turn off the faucet and you will observe static equilibrium. But if you
unplug the drain and then turn on the faucet so the level of the bathtub
does not change, you are witnessing dynamic equilibrium. Another example
is the human body. It remains in dynamic equilibrium so long as the heat
loss from cooling remains in balance with the consumption of sugars.

**Economic equilibrium**: The simplest case of balance or equilibrium
between desire and effort is found when a person satisfies one of his
wants by his own direct work. When a boy picks blue-berries for his own
eating, the action of picking is probably itself pleasurable for a
while; and for sometime longer the pleasure of eating is more than
enough to repay the trouble of picking. But after he has eaten a good
deal, the desire for eating diminishes; while the task of picking begins
to cause weakness, which may indeed be a feeling of monotony rather than
fatigue.

Equilibrium is reached when at last his eagerness to play and his
disinclination for the work of picking counterbalance the desire for
eating.[^3^](javascript:void(0))

**Efficient market theory**: Fama's message was clear. Stock prices are
unpredictable because the market is too efficient. In an efficient
market, a great many smart people (Fama called them "rational profit
maximizers") have simultaneous access to all the relevant information,
and they aggressively apply that information in a way that causes prices
to adjust instantaneously---thus restoring equilibrium---before anyone
can profit. Predictions about the future therefore have no place in an
efficient market, because share prices fully reflect all available
information.

**Sharpe**: Sharpe was awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics for
developing "a market equilibrium theory of asset prices under conditions
of risk." His theory was originally outlined in a 1964 paper entitled
"Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions
of Risk." Sharpe explained, "In equilibrium, there is a simple linear
relationship between the expected return and standard deviation of
return (defined as risk)."[^11^](javascript:void(0)) According to
Sharpe, the only way to achieve a greater return is to incur additional
risk. To increase expected returns, investors need only march further
out the capital market line. Conversely, if investors wished to assume
less risk, they would step down the capital line and by doing so receive
less return. In either case, equilibrium is maintained.

**The counterview from Santa Fe suggests the opposite: a market that is
not rational, is organic rather than mechanistic, and is imperfectly
efficient. It assumes the individual agents are, in fact, irrational and
hence will misprice securities, creating the possibility for profitable
strategies.**

# Biology

## Evolution

Whereas in nature the process of evolution is one of natural selection,
seeing the market within an evolutionary framework allows us to observe
the law of economic selection.

## Complex adaptive systems

El Farol, a bar in Santa Fe, New Mexico, used to feature Irish music on
Thursday nights. Arthur, the Irishman, loved to go there. On most
occasions, the bar patrons were well behaved, and it was enjoyable to
sit and listen to the music. But on some nights, the bar was packed with
so many people crammed together drinking and singing that the scene
became unruly. Now Arthur was confronted with a problem: How could he
decide which nights to go to El Farol and which nights to stay home? The
chore of having to decide led him to formulate a mathematical theory he
named the El Farol Problem. It has, he says, all the characteristics of
a complex adaptive system.

Suppose, says Arthur, there are one hundred people in Santa Fe who are
interested in going to El Farol to listen to Irish music, but none of
them wants to go if the bar is going to be crowded. Now also suppose the
bar published its weekly attendance for the past ten weeks. With this
information, the music lovers will build models to predict how many
people will show up next Thursday. Some may figure that it will be
approximately the same number of people as last week. Others will take
an average of the last few weeks. A few will attempt to correlate
attendance data to the weather or to other activities for the same
audience. There will be endless ways to build models to predict how many
people will go to the bar.

Now let's say that every lover of Irish music decides that the comfort
level in the small bar is sixty people. All one hundred people will
decide, using whatever predictor has been the most accurate over the
last few weeks, when the limit is going to be reached. Because each
person has a different predictor, on any given Thursday some people will
turn up at El Farol and others will stay home because their model has
predicted more than sixty people will be attending. The following day,
El Farol publishes its attendance and the hundred music lovers will
update their models and get ready for next week's prediction.

The El Farol process can be termed an ecology of predictors, says
Arthur. At any point, there is a group of models that are deemed
"alive"---that is, they are useful predictors of how many people will
attend the bar. Conversely, predictors that turn out to be inaccurate
will slowly die off. Each week, new predictors, new models, new beliefs
will compete for use by other music lovers.

We can quickly see how the El Farol process echoes the Darwinian idea of
survival through natural selection and how logically it extends to
economies and markets. In the markets, each agent's predictive models
compete for survival against the models of all other agents, and the
feedback that is generated causes some models to be changed

| Biological                 | Financial                                 |
|----------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| Species                    | Trading Strategy                          |
| Individual organism        | Trader                                    |
| Genotype (genetic const.)  | Functional representation of strategy     |
| Phenotype (appearance)     | Actions of the strategy (buying, selling) |
| Population                 | Capital                                   |
| External environment       | Price and other informational input       |
| Selection                  | Capital allocation                        |
| Mutation and recombination | Creation of new strategies                |

If we go back through the history of the stock market and seek to
identify the trading strategies that dominated the landscape, I believe
there have been five major strategies,

1.  In the 1930s and 1940s, the discount-to-hard-book value strategy,
first proposed by Benjamin Graham.

2.  After World War II the second major strategy that dominated finance
was the dividend model. As the memories of the 1929 market crash faded
and prosperity returned, investors were increasingly attracted to stocks
that paid high dividends, and lower-paying bonds lost favor. So popular
was the dividend strategy that by the 1950s, the yield on
dividend-paying stocks dropped below the yield of bonds---a historical
first.

3.  By the 1960s, a third strategy appeared. Investors exchanged stocks
paying high dividends for companies that were expected to grow their
earnings at a high rate.

4.  By the 1980s, a fourth strategy took over. Warren Buffett stressed
the need to focus on companies with high "owner-earnings" or cash flows.

5.  Today we can see that cash return on invested capital is emerging as
the fifth new strategy.

# Sociology

## Diversity and independence

Johnson's research suggests that the stock market, theoretically, is
more robust when it is composed of a diverse group of agents---some of
average intelligence, some of below-average intelligence, and some very
smart---than a market singularly composed of smart agents. At first,
this discovery appears counterintuitive. Today, we are quick to blame
the amateur behavior of uninformed individual investors and day traders
for the volatile nature of the market. But if Johnson is correct, the
diverse participation of all investors, traders and speculators---smart
and dumb alike---should make the markets stronger, not weaker.

The two critical variables necessary **for a collective to make superior
decisions are *diversity* and *independence****.* If a collective is
able to tabulate decisions from a diverse group of individuals who have
different ideas or opinions on how to solve a problem, the results will
be superior to a decision made by a group of like-minded thinkers.

We know the stock market is an incentive-based system that can aggregate
investor decisions. What we need to understand is the market's level of
diversity and the independence of its participants. If the stock market
is adequately diversified and, most importantly, if the decisions of its
participants have been reached independently, then it is likely the
market is efficient. Surowiecki reminds us that just because we can
observe some irrational investors, that does not necessarily mean the
market is inefficient. Indeed, proponents of the efficient market
hypothesis have latched onto the "wisdom of the crowds" as a plausible
explanation for market efficiency.

But what if independence is lost? What if the decisions of the market's
participants are not independent but are now coalesced into one opinion?
When this occurs, the system has effectively lost its diversity and
along with it any chance of generating an optimal solution. If diversity
is the key to how collectives can best reach solutions, then diversity
breakdowns are the cause of suboptimal outcomes---or in the case of the
stock market, diversity breakdowns cause the market to become
inefficient.

"information cascades (which can lead to diversity breakdowns) occur
when people make decisions based on the actions of others rather than on
their own private information. These cascades help explain booms, fads,
fashions, and crashes."[^12^](javascript:void(0)) Social network
theorists, who view social relationships in terms of nodes and ties,
whereby nodes are the individual actors and ties are the relationships
between the actors

## Self-organizing criticality

Most of the time, the interplay between trend followers and
fundamentalists is somewhat balanced. Buying and selling continue with
no discernible change in the overall behavior of the market. We might
say the sand pile is growing without any corresponding avalanche
effects. Put differently, diversification is present in the market.

But when stock prices climb, the ratio of trend followers to
fundamentalists begins to grow. This makes sense. As prices increase, a
larger number of fundamentalists decide to sell and leave the market and
are replaced by a growing number of trend followers who are attracted to
rising prices. When the relative number of fundamentalists is small,
stock market bubbles occur, explained Bak, because prices have moved far
above the fair price a fundamentalist would pay. Extending the sand pile
metaphor further, as the number of fundamentalists in the market
declines, and the relative number of trend followers increases, the
slope of the sand pile becomes ever steeper, increasing the possibility
of an avalanche. Once again, we can put this differently by saying that
when the mix of fundamentalists and trend followers becomes unbalanced,
we are heading toward a diversity breakdown.

It is important for us to remember at this point that while Per Bak's
self-organizing criticality explains the overall behavior of avalanches,
it does nothing to explain any one particular avalanche.

An obvious question at this point is how people select from a collection
of choices. According to Richards, if there is no clear favorite, the
tendency of the system is to continually cycle over the possibilities.
You might think this cyclical outcome would lead to instability, but
according to Richards, it need not if the agents share similar mental
concepts (that is, mutual knowledge) about the various choices. It is
when the agents in the system do not have similar concepts about the
possible choices that the system is in danger of becoming unstable. And
that is clearly the case in the stock market.

At this point, we have a fixed compass on how to analyze social systems.
Whether they are economic, political, or social, we can say these
systems are complex (they have a large number of individual units), and
they are adaptive (the individual units adapt their behavior on the
basis of interactions with other units as well as with the overall
system). We also recognize that these systems have self-organizing
properties and that, once organized, they generate emergent behavior.
Finally, we realize that complex adaptive systems are constantly
unstable and periodically reach a state of self-organized criticality.

# Psychology

## Loss aversion

*Equity risk premium* is a term many investors have heard but few
actually understand. It refers to the potential for higher returns
represented by the inherently risky stock market compared to the
risk-free rate, defined as the rate of a ten-year U.S. Treasury bond in
effect at whatever point you're considering. (It is called the risk-free
rate because up until now the government has never defaulted on its
loans.) Whatever return an individual stock or the overall stock market
earns beyond that rate is the investor's compensation for taking on the
higher risk of the stock market---the equity risk. For example, if the
return on a stock is 10 percent and the risk-free rate is 5 percent over
the same period, the equity risk premium would be 5 percent. The size of
the risk premium will vary based on the perceived riskiness of a
particular stock or the stock market as a whole. According to Aswath
Damodaran, professor of finance at the Stern School of Business at New
York University, the implied equity risk premium has vacillated between
less than 3 percent in 1961 and 6.5 percent in the early 1980s.

Thaler and Benartzi were puzzled by two questions. One, why is the
equity risk premium so high; and two, why is anyone willing to hold
bonds when we know that over the years, stocks have consistently
outperformed? The answer, they believed, rested upon two central
concepts from Kahneman and Tversky. The first was loss aversion. The
second was a behavioral concept called *mental accounting*.

T haler and Benartzi reasoned the longer the investor holds an asset,
the more attractive the asset becomes but only if the investment is
*not* evaluated frequently. If you don't check your portfolio every day,
you will be spared the angst of watching daily price gyrations; the
longer you hold off, the less you will be confronted with volatility and
therefore the more attractive your choices seem. Put differently, the
two factors that contribute to an investor's unwillingness to bear the
risks of holding stocks are loss aversion and a frequent evaluation
period.

Using the medical word for shortsightedness, Thaler and Benartzi coined
the term *myopic loss aversion* to reflect a combination of loss
aversion and the frequency with which an investment is measured.

Thaler and Benartzi next considered whether myopic loss aversion could
help explain the equity risk premium. They wondered what combination of
loss aversion and evaluation frequency would explain the historical
pattern of stock returns. How often, they asked, would an investor need
to evaluate a stock portfolio to be indifferent to the historical
distribution of returns on stocks and bonds? The answer: one year.

Thaler and Benartzi argue that any discussion of loss aversion must be
accompanied by a specification of the frequency by which returns are
calculated. Clearly, investors are less attracted to high-risk
investments like stocks when they evaluate their portfolio over shorter
time horizons. "Loss aversion is a fact of life," explain Thaler and
Benartzi. "In contrast, the frequency of evaluations is a policy choice
that presumably could be altered, at least in principle."

## Noise and signal

We are, through a long process of evolution, acutely uncomfortable and
anxious in the face of uncertainty, so much so that we are willing to
listen to those who promise to alleviate that anxiety. Even though we
know in the rational part of our minds that market forecasters cannot
predict what will happen tomorrow or next week, we want to believe they
can, because the alternative (not knowing) is too uncomfortable.

To overcome noise in a communication system, Shannon recommended that
what he called a "correction device" be placed between the receiver and
the destination. This correcting device would take the information from
the receiving terminal, separate out the noise, and then reconstruct the
messages so the information arrived correctly at its final destination.

Shannon's correction system is a perfect metaphor for how investors
should process information. We must mentally place a correcting device
in our information channel. The first task for this correcting device is
to maintain integrity of the information coming from the source. The
device must filter out incorrect source information and reconfigure the
signal if it has become garbled. The process for doing this is within
our control. To do so means improving our ability to gather and analyze
information and use it to further our understanding.

The other side of our correcting device, the side that faces the
receiving terminal, is responsible for verifying that the information is
properly passed through and accurately received, without interference of
psychological biases. The process for doing this is also within our
control, but it is challenging. We must make ourselves aware of all the
ways that emotion-based errors and errors of thinking can interfere with
good investing decisions, as described in this chapter, and we must
constantly be on guard against our own psychological missteps.

# Philosophy

If things remain a mystery, our job then is to shuffle our descriptions
and offer redescriptions. Think of it this way: redescriptions are very
powerful tools capable of breaking gridlock that sometimes occurs in the
pursuit of understanding. I firmly believe, for instance, that one
reason we have such difficulty understanding markets is that we have
been locked into an equilibrium description of how they should behave.
To reach a higher level of understanding, we must remain open-minded to
accepting new descriptions of systems that appear complex, whether they
are financial markets, social and political systems, or the physical
world.

For investors it is important to realize the slippery slope of
narratives. Storytelling inadvertently increases our confidence in
propositions as the story itself becomes its own proof. "The focus of
stories is on the individual rather than the averages, on motives rather
than movements, on context rather than raw data," explains
Paulos.[^15^](javascript:void(0)) Because investors primarily use
storytelling to explain markets and economies, the absence of
statistical evidence weakens the description. Quoting James Boswell,
best known as the biographer of Samuel Johnson: "A thousand stories
which the ignorant tell, and believe, die away at once when the
computist takes them in his gripe \[*sic*\]."[^16^](javascript:void(0))

The lessons we have learned thus far from Benoit Mandelbrot, Ludwig
Wittgenstein, C. P. Snow, and John Allen Paulos are all connected. The
right description is critical for providing the right explanation.
However, there is often more than one obvious description. Even so, we
go to great lengths to defend our chosen description, constructing
elaborate and entertaining stories in order to make our point despite
the risk of statistical inconsistencies.

The only way to do better than someone else, or more importantly, to
outperform the stock market, is to have a way of interpreting the data
that is different from other people's interpretations. To that I would
add the need to have sources of information and experiences that are
different.[^26^](javascript:void(0)) In studying the great minds in
investing, the one trait that stands out is the broad reach of their
interests. Once your field of vision is widened, you are able to
understand more fully what you observe, and then you use those insights
for greater investment success.

We live and work in a world in which the pace of change is staggering;
just when you think things can't possibly move any faster, the pace once
again accelerates. In such a world, successful performance demands
flexible thinking. In an environment of rapid change, the flexible mind
will always prevail over the rigid and absolute.

# Mathematics

## Variation within and variation of the system

The most important lesson investors can learn from Gould's experience is
to appreciate the differences between the trend *of* the system and
trends *in* the system. Put differently, investors need to understand
the difference between the average return of the stock market and the
performance variation of individual stocks. One of the easiest ways for
investors to appreciate the differences is to study sideways markets.

Putting it in Gould's terms, investors who observed the stock market
between 1975 and 1982 and focused on the market average came to the
wrong conclusion. They wrongly assumed that the direction of the market
was sideways, when in fact the variation *within* the market was
dramatic and led to plenty of opportunities to earn high excess returns.

## Regression to the mean

J. P. Morgan was once asked what the stock market would do next. His
response: "It will fluctuate." No one at the time thought this was a
backhanded way of describing regression to the mean. But this now-famous
reply has become the credo for contrarian investors. They would tell you
greed forces stock prices to move higher and higher from intrinsic
value, just as fear forces prices lower and lower from intrinsic value,
until regression to the mean takes over. Eventually, variance will be
corrected in the system.

The frustration comes from three sources. First, reversion to the mean
is not always instantaneous. Overvaluation and undervaluation can
persist for a period longer---much longer---than patient rationality
might dictate. Second, volatility is so high, with deviations so
irregular, that stock prices don't correct neatly or come to rest easily
on top of the mean. Last, and most important, in fluid environments
(like markets) the mean itself may be unstable. Yesterday's normal is
not tomorrow's. The mean may have shifted to a new location.

Fifty years ago, the S&P 500 Index was dominated by manufacturing,
energy, and utility companies. Today it is dominated by technology,
health care, and financial companies. Because the return on equity for
the latter three is higher than the first group of three, the average
return on equity of the index is now higher today than it was thirty
years ago. The mean has shifted. In the words of Thomas Kuhn, there has
been a paradigm shift.

Overemphasizing the present without understanding the subtle shifts in
composition can lead to perilous and faulty decisions. Although
regression to the mean remains an important strategy, it is imperative
that investors remember it is not inviolable. Stocks that are thought to
be high in price can still move higher; stocks that are low in price can
continue to decline. It is important to remain flexible in your
thinking. Although reversion to the mean is the most likely outcome in
markets, its presence is not sacrosanct.

# Decision Making

As investors, we too must strike a balance between exploiting what is
most obvious while allocating some mental energy to exploring new
possibilities.

By recombining our existing building blocks, we are in fact learning and
adapting to a changing environment. Think back for a moment to the
description of neural networks and the theory of connectionism in
[Chapter 1](javascript:void(0)). It will be immediately obvious to you
that by choosing and then recombining building blocks, what we are doing
is creating our own neural network, our connectionist model.

It's important to understand that you have the opportunity to discover
many new things and add new building blocks to your mental models
*without ever taking undue risk*. You can throw a lot of theories and
ideas into your thinking mix, assemble them into a model, and, like a
pilot in a flight simulator, try them out in the marketplace. If the new
building blocks prove useful, then keep them and give them the
appropriate weight. But if they appear to add no value, you simply store
them away and draw them up again some day in the future.

But remember, none of this will happen if you conclude that you already
know enough. Never stop discovering new building blocks. When a
corporation cuts its research and development budget to focus on the
here and now, that may produce greater profits in the short term, but
more likely it places the company in competitive jeopardy at some point
in the future. Likewise, if we stop exploring for new ideas, we may
still be able to navigate the stock market for a while, but most likely
we are putting ourselves at a disadvantage for tomorrow's changing
environment.
