Economics is about viewing the world as a place where humans face
scarcity. People face constraints, which means that they must make
choices in the face of tradeoffs. Choices are shaped by the costs and
benefits of the various alternatives---and those costs and benefits can
change over time.

Principles
==========

1.  People respond to incentives (stick and carrot)

2.  There is no free lunch (by choosing something you dismiss others -\>
    opportunity cost)

3.  There are always at least 2 sides to every interaction.

4.  There are usually unanticipated and unintentional consequences
    therefore no one is in complete control

Concepts
========

Thinking like an economist means being aware of the incentives you face
and, perhaps more importantly, the incentives those around you face. It
means anticipating what's strategically rational for them, and how that
will affect your options. It means focusing on the margin, on
trade-offs, and on adjustments to find the optimal balance. The question
is always how much? And of which?

-   Rationality (people will choose strategically rather than randomly)

1.  Clarify the objective

2.  Identify all possible alternative paths to achieve the objective.

3.  Evaluate carefully the payoffs from each of those alternatives.

4.  Select the option with the highest payoff

-   marginal analysis

-   The change in a starting total value from a slight increase or
    > decrease in an activity. If a bus company provides service between
    > 2 cities, the marginal cost is the addition to cost of taking on 1
    > more passenger. The marginal revenue is the increase in revenue
    > from selling the final ticket.

-   optimization

-   Figuring out the best attainable allocation given a set of
    > constraints.

-   E.g. limited resources to chose between food and shelter. The
    > optimal solution is to find the balance between food and shelter
    > that will make the marginal value of each of them equal; hence the
    > name "equimarginal principle."

Rational choices can lead all of us involved to better. They don't have
to. That failing is most likely to take place:

-   When our decisions and our strategies are interdependent

-   When my best strategy depends on your choice

-   When your best strategy depends on mine.

-   If we don't need each other's consent

-   if we don't communicate and we don't negotiate

-   if some kind of an enforceable agreement isn't possible

We may end up rationally choosing paths that harm us both.

Economic efficiency
===================

Rationality refers to the process by which individuals reach choices;
efficiency is a measure that we use to judge the social consequences of
those many choices. Economists define efficiency as people being made
better off. What determines whether you're better off? You do; it's a
measure of how you feel.

How to measure efficiency?
--------------------------

At the beginning of the 20^th^ century, economists gave up to find a way
to objectively measure when society is better off. They figured they
could not find a strong, objective measure of social welfare, so they
settled for a very weak one instead. They adopted a principle from the
sociologist Vilfredo Pareto, who said that the only unambiguous standard
of a social gain is this:

**If we take a number of people, and something makes any one of them
better off by their own judgment without making anyone else worse off,
that is an unambiguous social improvement.**

**We call such a situation in which no one can be made better off
without harming another a Pareto optimum.** The allocation of resources
is efficient but not necessarily fair.

Value to any person is the marginal contribution to that person's
welfare, and it can be quite different in different circumstances or for
different people. The value of a glass of water when I'm sitting at home
next to a free-flowing tap versus when I'm crawling across a broiling
desert is quite different.

**Economic efficiency is the exhaustion of all possible unambiguous
increases in self-defined welfare.** We know that individual rationality
will promote it, as long as the incentives driving each decider reflect
the costs and benefits that result from decisions.

-   Each harm must be accurately compensated

-   each gain must be appropriately priced

-   rights must be clearly defined

-   information must be complete and true

-   promises must be kept.

But this, of course, is not the world in which we live.

-   We may not understand the true consequences of our actions

-   we may voluntarily choose ones that make us worse off

-   people may lie about their intentions or break their promises

-   rights may be ambiguous.

**It is when the incentives that guide choices fail to be accurate or
comprehensive that individual rational choices can make the decider, or
someone else, worse off.**

Thinking like an economist has its greatest value in these
instances---by understanding the harms that these imperfections cause
and formulating strategies to overcome them.

Incentives and Optimal Choice
=============================

The rules and rights surrounding any interaction define the incentives
that relevant individuals face. Altering, clarifying, or redesigning
rights will also redefine optimal strategies for players.

In thinking like an economist, you should always ask yourself the
following questions:

-   Are the rules and rights in this situation creating any prisoner's
    dilemma incentives--- incentives that cause individuals to adopt
    rational strategies that ultimately harm us all?

-   Could the rules or rights be redesigned or renegotiated to induce
    individuals to reach better decisions?

-   Are there real consequences to a choice that are somehow not being
    paid for, that are not accounted for, in the incentives facing this
    decider?

-   How are the false incentives distorting the outcome?

-   Are there mechanisms we can employ to be sure that the consequences
    are going to be effectively priced?

-   Are there free rider problems here that are preventing our
    cooperation that would make many of us better off?

Externalities
-------------

One kind of inaccuracy that is important to economists is
**externalities**, which occur any time we take an action that creates a
benefit for somebody else or imposes a cost on somebody else with no
payment made.

When externalities exist, rational individual decisions can lead to
inefficient outcomes in 2 distinct ways:

-   False incentives may cause us to make decisions that cause
    significant harm to other people,

-   we may fail to consider choices that would cause benefit.

Commons
-------

A commons is something that we all use collectively and no one is
directly responsible for.

The presumption is that we'll all use the commons responsibly, but the
incentives for each user of a commons work against that hope.

If other people pay the costs, I get protected without doing a thing; I
can be what economists call a free rider. There are 2 practical ways to
try to overcome the free rider problem:

**There are strong economic forces incentivizing us to use the
atmosphere as a free-for-all dump for greenhouse gases.**

-   compulsory participation (e.g., taxation)

-   and linking the public good to a desirable private good (e.g.,
    getting people to pay voluntarily).

Expected value
--------------

It is the average outcome that would result from repeating the same
decision multiple times.

-   Take the probability (1 divided by the number of total possible
    outcomes.) of each possible outcome

-   multiply that by the value of the outcome

-   add all of these values together

-   It is up to us to estimate carefully both the probabilities and the
    payouts from various outcomes.

-   Do not be misled by other people's interpretation of risk, which
    will not necessarily mesh with yours

-   Our knowledge of probabilities can be systematically distorted.

-   When there's a lot of group interaction, the people making decisions
    feed off each other.

-   Rationally ignorant people (i.e., all of us) are susceptible to
    information cascades that can lead us wildly astray. If all or many
    members in a group are uninformed of actual facts but form opinions
    based on the number of others who assert something to be true.

    Knowing the expected value helps you make a rational decision.

Time value/preference of money
==============================

People almost always prefer to have good things happen sooner and bad
things happen later. Economists refer to this as pure time preference.

discounted present value and future value

At 5% p.a interest 105 is the one year future-value of 100 today.

At 5% p.a. interest 100 is the present value equivalent of 105 in a
year.

Behavioral Economics
====================

Not considering people as 100% rational but taking into account our
personal preferences and biases.

Doesn't rationality dictate that you should choose to receive money over
not receiving any? Not necessarily; rationality refers to the process of
reaching decisions, not to the objectives and motivations. The evidence
here is showing us that for many people, fairness has a real value, and
unfairness has a real cost. Therefore, rationality requires that their
behavior respond to that.

-   We adopt subjective anchor points that set parameters for our
    decisions

-   We remain attached to past decisions even when they no longer make
    sense

-   We revalue things simply because we possess them.

Loss aversion:

There's no rational reason why the value we place on \$1 won versus \$1
lost should be much different, but experimentally we find that a loss
hurts about twice as much as a gain helps.

**tragedy of the commons**: When enough people use a common resource,
there is an incentive for each to overuse the resource because they
personally receive all the beneÂ¿ ts from overuse while the costs imposed
by overuse are shared by all; of course, if everyone follows this logic,
then the common resource is depleted and even ruined for all.

**framing**: When a certain outcome can be described in different
ways---and how it is described affects how people respond.

**loss aversion**: When people have a greater preference for avoiding
losses of a certain size than they do for achieving gains of the same
size.

**reference point**: When people make decisions based on how the outcome
relates to their internal sense of what is appropriate or fair.

Herd behaviour
--------------

**Information cascade:** Part of the information that people use in
making decisions is to look at the decisions made by others, and as a
result, it is possible that a misguided decision can spread.

For stock analysts there are modest gains from doing better than the
group, but there is a real chance of getting Â¿ red if one does much
worse than the group.

Under a repressive government, many citizens will hide their private
reactions and, instead, will go with the crowd in professing support for
the government. However, if circumstances disrupt this information
cascade, and many citizens begin revealing their private information at
once, the result can be an overthrow of a repressive government.

In political campaigns, every candidate wants to create a sense that the
herd is moving their way so that people will disregard their own private
preferences and go with the herd, which has a chance of winning.

We should also be aware of the possibility that the information cascade
has headed off in an incorrect direction. Therefore, you should value
the entrepreneurs and dissenters who question conventional wisdom, and
nourish a germ of skepticism for yourself.
