## Rule #2: Choose Your Distractions Mindfully {#rule-2-choose-your-distractions-mindfully}

Rule #2 ensures you work in a focused way while remaining open to your surroundings and recognizing when you should change focus.

Rule #2 invites us to make a subtle evaluation of every distraction. Should I deal with this distraction now or let it go? This doesn’t mean you keep working on the task and shift your atten- tion back and forth between your boss and your task. That would be multitasking, and we already know that doesn’t work. Instead, Rule #2 requires consciously choosing to let go of the task you were working on and focusing your full attention on your boss. Rule #1 becomes re- engaged at this point.

1.  As the first quadrant shows, when you are focused but on autopilot, your state of mind can be described as being in “flow.” Some people prefer to be in this state, especially when they’re tackling routine tasks or physical work. Flow is characterized by some degree of absorption and therefore lacking awareness of external distractions. This can pose a problem even during routine work, because you may neglect sensory signals of important events around you or physiological signals indicating you need rest, movement, or food. We need awareness to pick up on relevant distractions—like our boss coming into our office
2.  In the second quadrant—defined as “mindful”—we have the greatest mental bandwidth to complete tasks and the highest quality of interactions with our environment and other people. Representing the junction of the two rules of mental effectiveness, the second quad- rant equates to being present with ourselves and what we’re doing. It helps us when we encounter difficult situations and is crucial when we want to optimize our performance at work. It’s a state of mind that is one second ahead of external and mental distractions. It’s the best response to the digital age and a way of improving your performance in an attention economy.
3.  In the third quadrant, you’re neither focused nor aware. Some people see this quadrant as the most relaxing. Taking a closer look, though, you may find that is not the case. Next time you find yourself day- dreaming on distracted autopilot, check in with your experience: are you truly relaxed? With a bit of training you will see that a focused mind is much more relaxed than a distracted mind.
4.  In the fourth quadrant, you’re aware but easily distracted. There can be benefits to loosening focus and allowing random thoughts to bubble up. Some people find that they come up with more creative ideas in this quadrant. But if your mind is too distracted, you’ll have difficulty retaining any good ideas. Good ideas only become innovative solutions when you have the focus to retain and execute them.