## Habit 5: Seek First to Understand, Then to Be Understood {#habit-5-seek-first-to-understand-then-to-be-understood}

Most people do not listen with the intent to understand; they listen with the intent to reply. They&#039;re either speaking or preparing to speak. They&#039;re filtering everything through their own paradigms, reading their autobiography into other people&#039;s lives. &quot;Oh, I know exactly how you feel!&quot; &quot;I went through the very same thing. Let me tell you about my experience.&quot; They&#039;re constantly projecting their own home movies onto other people&#039;s behavior. They prescribe their own glasses for everyone with whom they interact.

### Emphatic listening {#emphatic-listening}

When I say empathic listening, I am not referring to the techniques of &quot;active&quot; listening or &quot;reflective&quot; listening, which basically involve mimicking what another person says. That kind of listening is skill-based, truncated from character and relationship, and often insults those &quot;listened&quot; to in such a way. It is also essentially autobiographical. If you practice those techniques, you may not project your autobiography in the actual interaction, but your motive in listening is autobiographical. You listen with reflective skills, but you listen with intent to reply, to control, to manipulate. When I say empathic listening, I mean listening with intent to understand. I mean seeking first to understand, to really understand. It&#039;s an entirely different paradigm.

Empathic (from empathy) listening gets inside another person&#039;s frame of reference. You look out through it, you see the world the way they see the world, you understand their paradigm, you understand how they feel.

Empathy is not sympathy. Sympathy is a form of agreement, a form of judgment. And it is sometimes the more appropriate emotion and response. But people often feed on sympathy. It makes them dependent. The essence of empathic listening is not that you agree with someone; it&#039;s that you fully, deeply, understand that person, emotionally as well as intellectually.

In empathic listening, you listen with your ears, but you also, and more importantly, listen with your eyes and with your heart. You listen for feeling, for meaning. You listen for behavior. You use your right brain as well as your left. You sense, you intuit, you feel. Empathic listening is so powerful because it gives you accurate data to work with. Instead of projecting your own autobiography and assuming thought, feelings, motives, and interpretation, you&#039;re dealing with the reality inside another person&#039;s head and heart. You&#039;re listening to understand. You&#039;re focused on receiving the deep communication of another human soul.

You will never be able to truly step inside another person, to see the world as he sees it, until you develop the pure desire, the strength of personal character, and the positive Emotional Bank Account, as well as the empathic listening skills to do it.