## To be liked

### Association with positive context

Pairing yourself with pleasurable stimuli another person will begin to
associate you with this feeling. If you want to be liked by a person,
try talking to him when he is in a good mood or excited about something.

### Repeat exposure

The more you interact with someone, the more he or she will like you.

### We like those who like us

You want to let your "target person" know that you like and respect him,
if indeed you do.

What if he really doesn't like me at all?, he will eventually like you
more than if he had liked you right from the beginning. Gradual liking
is infinitely more effective than instantly becoming someone's best
friend. To engage the law of reciprocal affection gradually, let it be
known that you are fond of this person.

### Like attracts like

It all comes down to the fact that we all want to be understood, and
this powerful event has likely helped to shape the person into who she
is today; hence this other person "knows and understands" what she is
all about.

### Make people feel good (about themselves)

### Helping out

People dislike others more after doing them harm. In an attempt to
reduce dissonance, reducing this inner conflict we rationalize our
actions to remain consistent with our self-concept.

This works in reverse as well. We like someone more after doing
something nice for him or her.

### Make mistakes

The one who is confident and secure is the one who is apt to laugh at
his own mistakes and is not afraid to let people know that he is human.

### Keep smiling and radiate a positive attitude

## Be attractive (to the other sex)

### Arousal causes attraction

Anytime a person is aroused, such as with scary movies, amusement park
rides, or even physical exercise, his arousal will in part be attributed
to whomever he is with. The next time you see a couple who appears to be
"aesthetically" mismatched, ask where they met. Chances are good that
they met under circumstances where arousal was high\...maybe at the gym
or while one person (the better-looking of the two) was apprehensive,
nervous, or excited about something.

### Eye contact

Look her directly in the eyes when speaking and listening

## How to Spot a False Alibi by Asking a Single Question

Let's say a woman suspected that her husband was not at the movies with
his friends, as he said, but out with his secretary for a late night
rendezvous. Introduce a made-up "fact" and then sees how he handles it.
For instance she might say, "Oh, I heard that the traffic was all backed
up because of a car accident right outside the theater." Now all she has
to do is sit back and watch how he responds.

This is because her husband is faced with an obvious conundrum. If he
wasn't at the movies, he doesn't know whether to acknowledge that there
was an accident because there might not have been one. And if he says
that there wasn't much traffic and there was, then she'll also know he
wasn't really at the movies. But regardless of his answer, he will do
the one thing that every liar does when confronted with conundrum: He
will hesitate---deciding how to answer.

## Spot bluffing

If a person is bluffing they usually overcompensate their reaction in
trying to pretend what they intentions are. They might bet overly
quickly, be overly confident. A person who is bluffing will always
overcompensate to create the illusion that he is 100 percent behind his
convictions.

## Find out what people are really up to

For instance let's say that a woman suspects her husband of having an
affair with his secretary. Casually, maybe over dinner, she would say,
"Gee, you know what, honey? My boss, Jim, I think he may be having an
affair with his secretary." Now she simply observes his reaction. If he
asks questions and becomes interested in the conversation she can be
reasonably sure that he's not doing the same thing. But if he becomes
very uncomfortable and looks to change the subject, then it's likely
he's engaged in a similar behavior. And she will notice this immediate
shift in his demeanor and attitude.

You're not sure if your coworker really likes your idea for a new
marketing campaign, even though she says that she does.

Q: Do you like the concept for my new idea?

A: Sure. It's very original.

Q: Well, what would it take for you to love the idea?

Example II

You want to know if your son is looking forward to going to camp this
summer.

Q: Are you excited about camp next month?

A: Yeah. It'll be fun.

Q: What would it take for you to be really excited about going?

## Convince someone of an idea

Point out how your idea prevents negative consequences rather than what
to gain

Try to point out how the idea is consistent with the thinking of the
other person

Emotions are more important than logic in persuasion (logic is used to
justify the decision)

Show excitement for the new idea.

## Get people to follow-though no their commitments

Using phrases such as "You're the kind of person who\..."; "You've
always impressed me with your ability to\..."; or "I've always liked the
fact that you\..." invokes the powerful psychological law of internal
consistency.

When you initially ask for the favor, hit as many of these five points
as you can: (a) Get him to say it; (b) get a specific time frame; (c)
develop a sense of obligation; (d) engage his conscience; and (e) have
him tell you how things will unfold.

•  Then end the conversation with a firm verbal confirmation and a
simple phrase such as, "So I'll see you next Saturday, right?"

•  Finally, as the day approaches let him know that you appreciate that
he's someone who really follows through and/or that you are glad that he
knows the true value of friendship/responsibility/loyalty---whichever
best applies.
