## If the map doesn't agree with the ground, the map is wrong

Evaluate and adjust your behaviour, don't stick to wrong models/beliefs.

Evaluate people based on traits that like kindness

## We are what we do

Past behavior is the most reliable predictor of future behaviour. In
general, we get, not what we deserve, but what we expect The three
components of happiness are something useful to do, someone to love, and
something to look forward to. We love someone when the importance of his
or her needs and desires rises to the level of our own. The point is
that love is demonstrated behaviorally.

## It is difficult to remove by logic an idea not placed there by logic in the first place

If most of our behavior is driven by our feelings, however unclear they
may be, it follows that to change ourselves we must be able to identify
our emotional needs and find ways of satisfying them that do not offend
those upon whom our happiness depends. If we wish, as most of us do, to
be treated with kindness and forbearance, we need to cultivate those
qualities in ourselves.

## Any relationship is under the control of the person who cares the least

## The perfect is the enemy of the good.

The problem with perfectionists and their preoccupation with control is
that the qualities that make them effective in their work can render
them insufferable in their personal lives. I treat a lot of engineers
and accountants and computer programmers. To be less controlling in
their jobs would render them ineffective. The best one can hope for is
to introduce them to the paradox of perfection: in some settings,
notably in our intimate relationships, we gain control only by
relinquishing it.

## Life's two most important questions are "Why?" and "Why not?" The trick is knowing which one to ask.

To take the risks necessary to achieve this goal (find love) is an act
of courage. To refuse to take them, to protect our hearts against all
loss, is an act of despair.

## Our greatest strengths are our greatest weaknesses.

One theme that is played out in many marriages is the coming together of
someone with strong obsessive characteristics (usually a man) with
someone else who has a more impulsive and theatrical personality
(usually a woman). These people are initially drawn to each other
because of complementary needs. The man is in need of more entertainment
in his life and he values the woman as less inhibited, more spontaneous
than he. The woman sees the well-organized and meticulous man as
promising a measure of restraint that will balance her impulsive
tendencies. It's easy to see why such a relationship often contains the
seeds of disappointment and frustration. (He: "Why can't you be more
responsible?" She: "You just don't know how to have fun.")

People with compulsive character structures are vulnerable to
depression, as is anyone who seeks perfection in an imperfect world. It
is often puzzling to such people that approaches that make them
successful in their work are so poorly received by those they live with.
Obsessive people put a strong emphasis on control. Anything that
threatens this sense of being in charge induces anxiety. This leads
inevitably to efforts to reassert control, in effect redoubling the
behaviors that produced the problem in the first place. The resultant
conflict produces feelings of frustration and discouragement that
further reinforce a sense of failure.

Practically any human characteristic---competitiveness, orderliness,
even kindness---when indulged to an extreme can produce undesirable
results. Perhaps this is just another argument for moderation in all
things. But we need to acknowledge that those qualities of which we are
most proud can prove our undoing.

## Happiness is the ultimate risk

There might be advantages to their being depressed.

One of the benefits is that it is a safe position. The same, of course,
could be said of chronic pessimism, which is often both a precursor and
manifestation of depression. It is hard to disillusion pessimists; they
are already discouraged and therefore immune to unhappy surprise.
Because their expectations are chronically low, pessimists (who
invariably see themselves as realists) are seldom disappointed.

**To be happy is to take the risk of losing that happiness. All
significant accomplishments require taking risks: the risk of failure in
invention, in exploration, or in love.**

**what is psychotherapy? It is goal-directed conversation in the service
of change.**

It is not so much what occurs, but how we define events and respond that
determines how we feel. The thing that characterizes those who struggle
emotionally is that they have lost, or believe they have lost, their
ability to choose those behaviors that will make them happy.

## True love is the apple of Eden

It seems ironic that when people fall in love, no justification for
their attachment is necessary. It is accepted that the process by which
we are drawn to another is mysterious and beyond explanation.

The people around them accept this and go ahead with the elaborate and
expensive ceremony that will celebrate the beginning of their lives
together. When, on the other hand, people fall out of love, the demands
for an explanation are insistent: What happened? Who's at fault? Why
couldn't you work it out? "We didn't love each other anymore" is not, in
most cases, a sufficient response.

## Only bad things happen quickly

One of the common fantasies entertained by those seeking change in their
lives is that it can be rapidly achieved. Once we "know" what to do it
appears that we ought to be able simply to do it. That these sudden
transformations are rare is a source of puzzlement to many.

The process of building has always been slower and more complicated than
that of destruction.

So, here's to the role of time, patience, and reflection in our lives.
If we believe it is better to build than destroy, better to live and let
live, better to be than to be seen, then we might have a chance, slowly,
to find a satisfying way through life, this flicker of consciousness
between two great silences.

## Don't do the same thing and expect different results

Because going to the dentist is for most of us an unpleasant experience.
It is common, therefore, for people to "forget" their appointments. When
we forget other things: birthdays, anniversaries, names, promises, it is
also possible to discern underlying attitudes that may be hard for us to
acknowledge openly.

So, it is with our choice of people to be with. Nearly every human
action is in some way an expression of how we think about ourselves.

## The major advantage of illness is that it provides relief from responsibility 

One of the basic rules of animal psychology is that any behavior that is
reinforced will continue; behavior that is not will extinguish. A monkey
will pull a lever for a long time if he is rewarded by food, even at
intermittent and unpredictable intervals. If the food stops completely,
the lever-pulling will, over time, cease. So it is with people. We do
those things repetitively that produce some reward. It is just hard
sometimes to discern what that reinforcement might be.

Â 

## 
