Markers
=======

Assuring
--------

-   Cite authorities

-   I'm sure

Discounting
-----------

use possible ways opponents can counter your argument.\
-although\
-while\
-however\
-but

Guarding
--------

-   Used to Protect Premise form attack; weakens claim:\
    -All\--\> Most\
    introduces probability:\
    -its likely that\...\
    Reduces level of commitment:\
    -I know that\--\> I believe that

Premise/Argument marker
-----------------------

-   Because

-   Since

Conclusion marker
-----------------

-   Therefore

-   So

-   Thus

-   Hence

Arguments validity
==================

1.  Identify all of an argument's premises.

2.  Imagine that all of them are true (even if you know that some are
    false).

3.  Then ask yourself this question: supposing that all of the premises
    were true, could the conclusion be false? If yes, the argument is
    invalid. The premises do not guarantee the conclusion. If no, the
    argument is valid. The premises offer perfect logical support for
    the conclusion.

Validity is a matter of how well an argument's premises support its
conclusion. To test for this, we must assume that all of an argument's
premises are true. We then ask whether the conclusion must therefore be
true. If so, the argument is valid. If not, not.

**Note that an argument's validity is a matter of the argument's
structure. It has nothing to do with the actual truth or falsity of an
argument's premises or conclusion.** Indeed, valid arguments may contain
false premises and false conclusions.

Argument soundness
==================

a valid argument where all of the premises are true.

Conditional (implication) =\>)
==============================

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_Ethics/media/image1.png)**=
same as φ =\> ψ**

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_Ethics/media/image2.png)

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_Ethics/media/image3.png)

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_Ethics/media/image4.png)

Sufficient condition
--------------------

sufficient condition is a guarantee:

-   If X is a sufficient condition of Y, then X suffices for Y

-   X is enough for Y

-   X guartantees Y

-   If X is true, then Y is true

-   if X is the case, then Y is the case.

In most classrooms, getting a 95 percent average is a sufficient
condition of receiving an A. Being a human is a sufficient condition of
being a mammal. Having a child is a sufficient condition of being a
parent.

Necessary condition
-------------------

Necessary conditions are requirements.

-   If X is a necessary condition of Y, then X is needed for Y

-   X is a prerequisite of Y

-   X is required for Y

-   Y can be true only if X is true

-   Y can occur only if X does.

Having some money is a necessary condition of being a millionaire;
having a brain is a necessary condition of being a philosopher; for
some, having one's morning caffeine is a necessary condition of being
able to function properly.

Biconditional premise (equivalence \<=\>)
=========================================

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_Ethics/media/image5.png)

One of the big goals of ethical thinking is to try to identify a good,
wide-ranging test of what's morally right (or wrong). One way to think
about such a test is to view it as a statement of conditions that are
both necessary and sufficient for being morally right (or wrong).
A claim that supplies necessary and sufficient conditions is called a
biconditional.

A shorthand way to state biconditionals is to use this phrase: if and
only if. someone is a bachelor if and only if he is an unmarried male.
This says that being an unmarried male is both sufficient and necessary
for being a bachelor: if someone is an unmarried male, then he's a
bachelor, and he's a bachelor only if he's an unmarried male.

Think of this as a kind of fill-in-the-blank exercise. In moral
philosophy, we want **sufficient conditions** for being morally right.
So: **if (fill in your sufficient condition), then an act is morally
right.**

Now make sure that however you filled in that blank is also a
**necessary condition**: An act is morally right **only if** **(fill in
your sufficient condition)**. **The very same thing needs to fill in
both blanks. So: an act is morally right if and only if.** If you can
fill in that blank in a way that withstands scrutiny, you will have done
something truly great. You will have identified conditions that
guarantee the moral rightness of an act, and that are also required for
the act to be right.

Forms of arguments that are always valid
========================================

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_Ethics/media/image6.png)![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_Ethics/media/image7.png)

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_Ethics/media/image8.png)![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_Ethics/media/image4.png)

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_Ethics/media/image9.png)

Fallacies
=========

Here's an example of one of them. Suppose your friend tells you that if
God exists, then abortion is immoral. But she proceeds to claim that God
doesn't exist. So, she concludes, abortion is morally OK. Or suppose
that someone makes you the following offer: if you buy this item now,
then you'll get 50 percent off. So you think: well, if I don't buy it
now, then I'm not going to get that discount.

if I'm a millionaire, then I have at least ten dollars. (True.)

I'm not a millionaire. (True.)

Therefore, I don't have ten dollars. (False.)

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_Ethics/media/image10.png)

Premise 1 says that P is a guarantee for Q. Premise 2 says that this
guarantee doesn't hold. What follows? Nothing. That's because there can
be many sufficient conditions for something.

If life is meaningful, then God exists; God does exist; therefore, life
is meaningful.

1.  if I'm a millionaire, then I have ten dollars. (True.)

2.  I have ten dollars. (True.)

3.  Therefore, I'm a millionaire

<!-- -->

1.  if P, then Q

2.  Q is true

3.  therefore, P is true.
