Mindfulness
===========

Mindfulness means trained attention. Based on thousands of years of
practice, mindfulness techniques enable people to manage their
attention, improve their awareness, and sharpen their focus and clarity.

**A mind in balance, which sees reality clearly and values ethics.**

Life is about results. Results come from our actions. Our actions come
from the choices we make. Our choices come from the thoughts we think.

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_MIndfullness_at_work/media/image1.png)

We are living in an "attention economy" where the ability to man- age
our attention and the quality of our attention is key to our success.
But in the digital age, where our ability to pay attention at will is
under siege, we have a problem.

But from a neurological perspective, we're not capable of focusing
attention on two things at the same time. When we think we are
multitasking, what we are doing in reality is shift-tasking : shifting
attention rapidly between two or more things.

Mindfulness is about you. It's about overcoming the multitasking trap,
and entering the attention economy being one second ahead of your
wandering mind and external distractions. It's about generating greater
mental effectiveness so that you can reach your full potential, both on
a professional and a personal level. Effectiveness in this context is
the ability to achieve your goals, objectives, and wishes in life.

The central characteristics of mindfulness are sharp focus and open
awareness. Sharp focus is the ability to concentrate single-pointedly on
any object of choice for a long as you want with minimal effort.
Training sharp focus provides the benefit of being fully present with
other people or tasks. Open awareness is the ability to see clearly what
is happening in your mind and make wise choices about where to focus
your attention. Through training open awareness, you gain clarity. The
clutter from the outer world and from your own mind is reduced. As you
become more insightful, even the most difficult problems appear less
complex and become easier to handle. Optimal effectiveness is achieved
when people are simultaneously sharply focused and openly aware.

Rule \#1: Focus on What You Choose
----------------------------------

Staying focused on the object of your choice is the first rule of mental
effectiveness. **A focused mind does not multitask: instead, it's fully
present on the person or task at hand.**

Rule \#2: Choose Your Distractions Mindfully
--------------------------------------------

Rule \#2 ensures you work in a focused way while remaining open to your
surroundings and recognizing when you should change focus.

Rule \#2 invites us to make a subtle evaluation of every distraction.
Should I deal with this distraction now or let it go? This doesn't mean
you keep working on the task and shift your atten- tion back and forth
between your boss and your task. That would be multitasking, and we
already know that doesn't work. Instead, Rule \#2 requires consciously
choosing to let go of the task you were working on and focusing your
full attention on your boss. Rule \#1 becomes re- engaged at this point.

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_MIndfullness_at_work/media/image2.png)

1.  As the first quadrant shows, when you are focused but on autopilot,
    your state of mind can be described as being in "flow." Some people
    prefer to be in this state, especially when they're tackling routine
    tasks or physical work. Flow is characterized by some degree of
    absorption and therefore lacking awareness of external distractions.
    This can pose a problem even during routine work, because you may
    neglect sensory signals of important events around you or
    physiological signals indicating you need rest, movement, or food.
    We need awareness to pick up on relevant distractions---like our
    boss coming into our office

2.  In the second quadrant---defined as "mindful"---we have the greatest
    mental bandwidth to complete tasks and the highest quality of
    interactions with our environment and other people. Representing the
    junction of the two rules of mental effectiveness, the second quad-
    rant equates to being present with ourselves and what we're doing.
    It helps us when we encounter difficult situations and is crucial
    when we want to optimize our performance at work. It's a state of
    mind that is one second ahead of external and mental distractions.
    It's the best response to the digital age and a way of improving
    your performance in an attention economy.

3.  In the third quadrant, you're neither focused nor aware. Some people
    see this quadrant as the most relaxing. Taking a closer look,
    though, you may find that is not the case. Next time you find
    yourself day- dreaming on distracted autopilot, check in with your
    experience: are you truly relaxed? With a bit of training you will
    see that a focused mind is much more relaxed than a distracted mind.

4.  In the fourth quadrant, you're aware but easily distracted. There
    can be benefits to loosening focus and allowing random thoughts to
    bubble up. Some people find that they come up with more creative
    ideas in this quadrant. But if your mind is too distracted, you'll
    have difficulty retaining any good ideas. Good ideas only become
    innovative solutions when you have the focus to retain and execute
    them.

Techniques
==========

Emails
------

Avoid email addition:

-   Disable email notifications

-   Don't do emails first thing in the morning ( use energy for
    something for useful )

-   Allocate only certain, fixed times during the day to fully focus on
    e-mail.

Before sending:

-   **Should this e-mail be sent at all? And should all these people be
    copied?**

    -   E-mail is widely overused. Make sure you're not just adding to
        the chatter. Make sure your e-mail really needs to be sent. It's
        okay to delete an e-mail if it really isn't that important.

-   **Does the e-mail contain the information needed for it to be
    understood correctly?**

    -   We've all sent or received a message without an attachment or
        other key detail. Oversights like these can cause multiple
        messages to go back and forth, all with similar ques- tions.
        Make sure you aren't wasting valuable time---yours or any- one
        else's.

-   **How will the recipient perceive this e-mail?**

    -   Put yourself in the recipient's shoes. How can you phrase this
        note to best avoid negative speculation in the recipient's mind?
        Taking just one second to think about how your e-mail will be
        perceived can be the difference between clear communication and
        an unfortunate misunderstanding. One thing is certain: saying
        "thanks" and "sorry" are always good ideas.

**Avoid Emotional E-mailing**

-   Wait one day before replying. When you come across an e-mail that
    generates negative reactions, stop. Do not give in to the impulse to
    answer immediately.

-   Think about alternative communications channels.

Meetings
--------

### Before

Preparing: Before you introduce an agenda, simply invite meeting
participants to take a brief mental break, to relax, settle their mind,
and become present in the room. Sitting in a room silently for a few
moments can create a strong feeling of togetherness and unity.

### During

Be present: In meetings, presence forms the foundation for
effectiveness. When we're present with other people, we get the most out
of our time together. Therefore, the fundamental rule for a mindful
meeting is: be completely present with those you are together with for
as long as you are together.

**Every meeting you're in, you have the opportunity to make the people
you're with the anchor of your attention. To do so, focus your attention
on the person who is speaking.**

### After

Fitting in some time at the end of a meeting to practice mindfulness can
also be of benefit in terms of softening a hard stop. Taking just a few
minutes can help further clear the mind and increase relaxation, focus,
and clarity for upcoming activities.

In fact, some companies have begun letting meetings finish a few minutes
early, giving participants the opportunity to settle and clear their
minds before their next activity. Also, if the meeting finishes at an
appropriate time, there's less of a rush. This means you have the
opportunity to look coworkers in the eye and thank them for their time
and attention. When a meeting is concluded with gratitude and
appreciation, people are more willing to meet again and a positive pat-
tern for meetings develops.

Goals
-----

When you have clear goals, it's far easier to stay focused and aware.
Similarly, when you're focused and aware, it's easier to keep your
actions aligned with your goals.

When it comes to maintaining clear goals, it's important to manage both
our conscious mind and our subconscious processes. Our sub- conscious is
primarily driven by two simple motivations: grasping for things we like
and avoiding things we don't like. While our subconscious often craves
short-term gratification, our conscious goals more often include delayed
gratification.

The more mindful you are, the more bandwidth of conscious attention you
have. Mindfulness increases the number of conscious bits you can
process. At the same time, it gives you a better awareness of what's
happening in your subconscious mind. Mindfulness allows you to better
align your conscious goals with your subconscious processes, keeping
your goals center stage and enhancing your chances of success.

### Mindful Goal Orientation 

-   When you find yourself behaving counter to your goals, take a
    mindful pause (---focus on your breath as you calm down, gaining
    focus and clarity. This establishes your awareness.

-   Ask yourself the question "What stories, beliefs, or grasping or
    avoidance is keeping me from doing the thing that moves me closer to
    my goal?"

-   Whatever you find, face it and dismantle it by being present with
    it.

-   Adjust your behavior and move on.

### Mindful Goal Setting 

-   Clearly defined and specific goals are easier for your subconscious
    to understand.

-   Positively framing your goals also makes it easier for your
    subconscious to process them. By default, the subconscious moves
    toward the desirable and away from the unpleasant.

-   Learning to hold our goals lightly, and let go of them if they won't
    bring us long-term happiness, is an important skill.

Priorities
----------

### Action Addiction

Addiction to action is one of the biggest threats to mental
effectiveness and productivity. The root cause of action addition is an
untrained mind. A well-trained mind is the only way to overcome it. The
tasks are in front of us, and we want to be useful and productive. The
problem is, when we don't step back to ensure we're spending time on
tasks aligned with our main goals, we end up wasting a lot of time on
immediate--- though often inessential---tasks.

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_MIndfullness_at_work/media/image3.png)

Focus your effort on the 20% that produce 80% of your output.

### Choice points -- when priorities conflict

Conflicting priorities are the most common causes of action addiction.
When two or more priorities conflict, you reach a choice point: a point
at which you need to decide how to best manage multiple priorities or
competing urgencies.

We often react to choice points by jumping into action. There it is
again, that action addiction. But, as you now know, not all action is
aligned with our goals. When priorities conflict, take a breath before
you jump into action. Endure the discomfort of conflicting priorities.

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_MIndfullness_at_work/media/image4.png)

### Speed Up by Slowing Down

By taking a brief pause, you're able to maintain your focus and
awareness. This allows you to respond to situations with the most
appropriate action---to concentrate on your priorities and
goals---rather than simply acting on autopilot.

Planning
--------

Real planning requires slowing down, so that you can speed up. It's an
investment in time up front that has significant payback down the road.

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_MIndfullness_at_work/media/image5.png)

Too often, instead of moving forward through intentional action, we end
up stuck in place: working, acting, trying, but not making any real
progress. The morning is the most important choice point of the day. As
it sets the tone for the rest of the day, it's critical to begin the
morning with a period of clear planning.

### Clear Planning on a Daily Basis 

When you get to work, make a habit of reserving the first ten minutes to
do the following:

-   Do one to two minutes of ABCD mindfulness training to enhance your
    focus and subdue the impulse of action addiction.

-   Make a short list of the highest priority activities of the day---or
    review a list you made at the end of the previous day.

-   Plan your calendar for the day according to the highest priorities.

-   Now, get to work.

-   Review your plan once or twice during the day to track your
    progress.

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_MIndfullness_at_work/media/image6.png)

-   **Weekly and monthly planning sessions can help you keep the big
    picture in mind and manage your calendar accordingly.**

-   **Allocate most of your time to completing activities that deliver
    the greatest outcomes for the least amount of effort.**

-   **Leave time for the urgent matters that will inevitably crop up.
    How much time you set aside for urgent matters depends on the nature
    of your work. Whatever you decide, saving a realistic margin of
    unscheduled time can help you avoid being put under unnecessary
    pressure.**

-   **Consider how much time you need to recharge your mental batteries
    every day---whether through small breaks, a short walk, or your ten
    minutes of mindfulness training.**

-   **Finally, make sure to reserve time for unavoidable "transition"
    activities, such as follow-up communication after meetings and
    travel.**

Communication
-------------

The foundation of mindful communication is, as in many other aspects of
life, being fully present in your interactions with other people. Only
when we're fully present do we get the most out of our time together.
And only when we're fully present can we be sure to under- stand what's
actually being communicated.

Empathy---being in tune with the feelings of others---plays a major role
in effective communication. If you have a sense of how the person with
whom you're trying to communicate feels, it's easier to get on their
wavelength.

From a neurological perspective, two fundamental tendencies in the human
mind create barriers to effective communication. First, there's the
reality of the mind's natural tendency to wander. The second tendency is
our mind's orientation to see things as we expect to see them, commonly
known as habitual perception. Habitual perception or cognitive rigidity
as it's also known---is the mind's natural desire to place reality into
simple, pre-existing categories. This causes us to believe the mind's
own limited projections about other people, ourselves, and all the
things we encounter. Thus we are being cognitively rigid when we limit
our perceptions. Both our wandering minds and this rigidity severely
hinder our ability to communicate.

### Listen with Mindfulness 

Simply put, listening with mindfulness involves giving your full
attention to whoever is speaking. There are four guidelines for
listening with this type of focus.

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_MIndfullness_at_work/media/image7.png)

###  Speaking with Mindfulness

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_MIndfullness_at_work/media/image8.png)

Creativity
----------

Take more intentional pauses throughout these meetings to give people
the opportunity to relax and release any of the attachment they had to
one idea or another.

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_MIndfullness_at_work/media/image9.png)

1.  Formulate the Problem (and write it down)

2.  Let go of the problem

3.  Allow time

4.  Activate

You've now identified a problem, let it go, and given your subconscious
time to work. The final task is to help your subconscious communicate
with your conscious.

Change
------

We are habitual beings. In fact, scientists estimate that 95 percent of
our behaviors are based on habit. In other words, only 5 percent of what
we do is based on conscious choice. Not only are we habitual, but we're
also neurologically programmed to prefer that things stay the same.
Familiarity provides us with a greater sense of psychological safety.

Learning to embrace the reality of constant change is a powerful thing.
When we experience a great day at work---or a challenging day---without
expecting that the next day will be the same, we become much more
resilient in the face of change. Building greater acceptance of the
reality of constant change is a foundation for more balance, less
stress, better health, and ultimately more peace of mind.

Hardwired to value certainty, our natural response is to resist
uncertainty in our environment. In fact, it would be strange if we
didn't experience some resistance to change. Since we're habitual
beings, doing anything differently takes effort. Even if the change is
something we want, it requires effort to overcome both our neurological
impulse to keep things the same as well as our ingrained habitual
patterns.

**When we try to resist resistance, we only generate more of it.** We
create an inner struggle that often leads to anger, frustration, stress,
and anxiety. Resisting resistance doesn't help us move forward; instead,
it negatively impacts both our health and well-being.

The key to managing resistance and thereby better managing change is to
face it and embrace it.

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_MIndfullness_at_work/media/image10.png)

Once you're able to observe your resistance, see whether there's
anything you can learn from it. Are you resisting simply because of your
natural preference for familiarity? Or are you resisting because
something legitimately doesn't make sense? Seeking to understand the
underlying driver of your resistance can be insightful.

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_MIndfullness_at_work/media/image11.png)

### Steps for Mindful Change Management 

1.  **Awareness of the change**

The first step is simply to recognize that things are changing. Gain as
much information as possible regarding the change and what it might
entail. Ideally, this process is done with a mind that accepts the
reality of constant change, enabling curiosity, rather than fear, to be
the driver behind the investigative process.

2.  **Awareness of your own resistance**

The second step is to be aware of any resistance to the change. If you
think you don't have any resistance, think again. It's natural for us to
resist change; there's nothing wrong with resistance. Resistance can be
very instructive and can help us gain insight into how to better manage
the change. When you become aware of any resistance, don't try to run
from it or resist it.

3.  **Observation of your resistance**

The third step is to observe the resistance. Seek to understand where it
comes from and what might be underlying it. See if there's anything you
can learn from it that might inform or enhance the change management
process.

4.  **Mindfully choose your response**

With a solid understanding of the change and your resistance to it, you
can choose a response. This may mean you choose to fully embrace the
change and let go of any resistance. It may also mean you choose to try
to skillfully influence the change process by mindfully presenting other
alternatives. It may mean you choose not to accept the change because
you realize it's not in your best interest. Regardless of your choice,
make the decision with a calm, clear mind.

5.  **Act**

The final step is to take action in accordance with your choices. This
is where you move forward. Although this step will help you better
manage the change process, that doesn't mean it will be easy! It's
helpful to acknowledge that it will be difficult to change habitual
patterns. You'll likely have ongoing spikes of resistance and setbacks
in the process. During this step, it's important to both identify and
accept the support you need to manage the change. This could be
attending training, being coached, or practicing mindfulness.

Mental energy
-------------

When it comes to conserving mental energy, mindfulness can help in four
key ways: being present, maintaining balance, making choices, and
leveraging cycles.
![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_MIndfullness_at_work/media/image12.png)

-   **Being Present**

    Being present in the here and now is a simple and easy way to
    conserve mental resources. When we allow our mind to wander
    aimlessly, it's using up valuable energy that could be better used
    in other pursuits.

-   **Maintaining Balance**

    Awareness of negative or positive thought spirals allows us to
    leverage balance. Being aware of the mind's tendency to succumb to
    attraction or aversion---to run toward things we want or away from
    things we don't want---is powerful.

-   **Making Choices**

    Follow the first rule of mental effectiveness and choose a task and
    stick with it. Notice the impact that not jumping back and forth
    between tasks can have on your energy.

-   **Leveraging Cycles**

    Our mental energy naturally ebbs and flows throughout the day, in
    cycles that have a lot to do with our sleep, nutrition, and level of
    physical activity. We simply are not always at peak mental
    performance. For most people, energy levels are higher first thing
    in the morning, after a good night's rest. Those energy levels tend
    to decrease during the day, with a low point after lunch, before
    increasing again later in the afternoon. Being mindful of our how
    our energy levels fluctuate enables us to be strategic about what we
    do and when.

Enhancing sleep
---------------

-   TURN off All Screens 60 Minutes before Sleep

-   Perceptual Activities 60 Minutes before Sleep

    Conceptual activities like intense conversations, replying to
    e-mails, working, or reading can arouse your attention and suppress
    your natural sleepiness. Instead of doing the dishes and other
    practical activities just after dinner, leave that for the last hour
    before sleep, instead of screen activities.

### Waking Mindfully

As you wake, be determined not to start thinking. Just be. Notice your
body. Notice your mind. But do not engage in the thoughts trying to
arise. Sit up, at the edge of your bed, and do two minutes of
mindfulness training. Focus on your breath and let go of any thoughts.

Eating and Energy
-----------------

To get the most out of mindful eating, there are three basic guidelines:

-   **Let Your Stomach Do the Eating**

> A simple mindful tip for eating is to let your stomach do the eating.
> There's no need to finish everything in front of you right this
> second.

-   **Avoid the Blood Sugar Rollercoaster**

> Many of us, seeking a quick antidote to feeling sleepy, ride the blood
> sugar rollercoaster during the afternoon hours. An hour or two after
> lunch, we hit the afternoon slump---a fatigue our brains mis- takes
> for a lack of blood glucose. A natural and automatic reaction is to
> grab a snack, a cup of coffee, or an energy drink to quickly raise our
> energy levels. But a snack---and a sugary one in particular---can
> raise blood sugar levels too high, leading to mood swings, brain fog,
> and stress. After a short while, blood sugar levels plummet. A sense
> of panic results due to the stress, cortisol, and adrenaline released
> when fatigue and brain fog set in. Then we're right back where we
> started, at the bottom of the roller coaster, with our brains craving
> another fix of fast energy.

-   **The Mindful Minute**

> Over time, allowing you a mindful minute before immediately snacking
> can mitigate the general craving that comes with natural tiredness.

-   Next time you feel desire for food, pause.

-   Allow yourself to mindfully observe the experience of desire.

-   Allow the experience to be present, without engaging and giving in
    to it. This is not meant to impart strict discipline and impulse
    control, merely a moment of mindfulness before you eat. Ask
    yourself, what does it feel like? Where do you experience the
    feeling, in your stomach or elsewhere? Is the experience changing or
    does it stay the same?

-   If after the minute, you're feeling the same desire, you may
    actually be hungry. In that case, eat. If there's little or no
    desire left, you weren't actually hungry. Your brain tried to trick
    you. But you were smarter, and dismantled the desire by simply
    allowing it to rise without engaging in it.

**When you're mindful of your food, awareness tells you when you have
had enough. You tend to eat less. You also tend to enjoy food more,
because you actually pay attention to it.**

Activity and energy
-------------------

**When you have positive physical experiences, your mind smiles.** In
this way, caring for the body is just as impactful as caring for the
mind. Getting good and sufficient sleep, eating properly, and being
physically active are all foundations for both performance and well-
being.

Maintaining a clear focus while undertaking physical activity trans-
forms a workout into a semi-mindfulness session and will improve your
experience.

**Relaxation---The Absence of Unnecessary Effort**

A relaxed body---one absent of unnecessary tension---has greater
endurance and generally feels more pleasant. As you train, occasionally
Activity and Energy scan your body for signs of unnecessary effort or
tension. Then relax. The more relaxed you are, the more you can do and
the more you'll enjoy it.

While relaxation is also important for the mind to avoid thinking and
distraction, the mind needs an object of focus. You need to have an
anchor---and that anchor is usually your breath. While breathing is a
great anchor while you're sitting still, it's equally powerful during
physical activity. But breath alone may not be enough. Instead, it can
be more effective to synchronize your breath with the natural rhythm of
your physical activity. When you run or walk, synchronize your steps
with your breath. Take a certain number of steps for each inhalation and
each exhalation. This way, you can easily maintain a focused and steady
rhythm for long periods. It's often easier than just focusing on your
breathing.

Focus and rhythm can be a big help, especially if you feel poorly or
experience pain. Most unpleasantness comes from our thoughts. Thoughts
come from physical sensations or other distractions. Your focus creates
your reality. Focus on unpleasantness, and your reality will be
unpleasant. Instead, focus on your breathing and rhythm---and experience
one moment at a time. As distractions appear, don't try to suppress
them. Simply take one moment after the other: one step after the other.
Inhale and exhale. Don't think about how much time you have left. Stay
in the moment. With relaxed focus, any unpleasantness or pain will
diminish.

Performance breaks
------------------

A mindful performance break is basically a very brief mindfulness
training session. And by brief, I mean about 45 seconds. To take mind-
ful performance breaks, try this, once every hour during work.

-   Let go of your activities. You don't need to go anywhere special.

-   Close your eyes or keep them open, whichever you prefer. Direct your
    full attention to your breath. For three breath cycles do the
    following:

    -   Breathe in while noticing your breath breathe out while relaxing
        your shoulders, neck, and arms.

    -   Breathe in while focusing fully on your inhale; breathe out
        while focusing on the exhale.

    -   Breathe in while enhancing the clarity of your attention;
        breathe out while maintaining clarity.

-   Let go of the exercise. Return to your work with renewed relaxation,
    focus, and clarity.

Emotional balance
-----------------

Emotions are a natural part of being human. Managed skillfully, they're
a powerful source of joy and energy. Unsuccessfully managed, however,
they can get in the way, becoming a source of frustration, conflict, and
regret.

In reality, having emotional balance equates to not getting caught up in
the natural ups and downs of our emotions. Emotional balance is a state
of being aware of our emotions enough to manage them in a way that is
gentle, honest, and wise.

Mirroring others' emotions is normal; it's your mirror neurons at play.
More about mirror neurons is presented in the mental strategy of Joy.
But in short, when we face someone joyful, mirror neurons in our brains
make us experience a similar joy. The same goes for anger, grief, and
almost all other emotions.

Most of us deal with our emotions by either suppressing them or acting
them out. The thing about suppressing emotions is that they have to go
somewhere. Like pressing down on a balloon, pushing your emotions down
only means they will pop up again somewhere else. Additionally,
suppressing emotions requires an enormous amount of mental
energy---energy that's diverted from our own focus and clarity. Acting
out our emotions, whether aggressively or passive aggressively, might
feel good in the moment. But if acting out is effective at all, it's
only in that moment. In the long run, acting out our emotions usually
leads to disappointment, regret, or shame.

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_MIndfullness_at_work/media/image13.png)

In mindfulness training, we work to develop the mental capacity, the
patience, and the courage to endure discomfort. At the same time, we
learn to observe our emotions with some neutrality. We put some kind of
distance between our emotions and ourselves. Instead of running on
autopilot, being absorbed with emotion and caught in its grip, we take a
moment to pause. We stay one second ahead of automatic reactions, giving
ourselves the time, space, and freedom to make conscious, deliberate
choices.

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_MIndfullness_at_work/media/image14.png)

### Emotional Awareness 

Being aware of the emotion---may sound obvious, but it's not always as
easy as it sounds. In the midst of our everyday busyness, the mind is
already occupied with myriad distractions and mountains of information.

### Mindful Embrace 

Simply notice that the emotion is there and hold it without suppressing
or acting on it. Open awareness training. Being able to see the emotion
as an experience, and not letting it overcome you, diminishes its power.
Instead of constantly fighting against the emotion, you're able to be
with it. When it comes to mindful embrace, your breath can be helpful.
While observing the emotion, pay attention to your breath; allow its
gentle rhythm to calm you.

###  Patience and Balance 

Patience is about having the courage to face the discomfort of the
emotion. Patience will help you endure and contain the emotion, rather
than flee from it. Whereas patience can help you ride out the emotion,
balance can keep you neutral. Balance can help you avoid any automatic
aversion or attraction you may have toward it. With the ability to
embrace the emotion with patience and balance, you can now maintain the
focus Emotional Balance and clarity necessary to determine the best,
most productive response to it.

### Appropriate Response 

Making a decision---choosing the most appropriate response to the
situation---based on your awareness of the emotion, your embracing of
it, and your patience and balance.

Work-life balance
-----------------

Imbalance is only a problem if people perceive it that way or if work
negatively impacts other areas of life.

**Focus ---**Training in mindfulness helps you feel less overwhelmed by
daily tasks and challenges. It helps provide the clarity of mind to
accept what you can't change, and make mindful choices about where to
place your limited attention---in a way that best serves you and others.
Further, it helps you be present with the imbalance, allowing you to sit
with the discomfort, observe it, and not let it overwhelm your mind.

**Awareness** ---Training in mindfulness helps you maintain awareness of
when you're not in balance. It helps keep you from falling into habitual
patterns that are unhealthy, both for yourself and others around you. It
also helps you distinguish between what you can and can't control.

Mindfulness helps you maintain balance within yourself by accepting
life's imbalances. It allows you to let go of things outside of your
control, saving all that mental energy to manage things within your
control and thereby reducing stress and worry.

Mental strategies
=================

Think of these strategies as another layer you can add on top of the
techniques to quickly and easily improve your performance at work. They
don't replace the techniques---and they certainly don't replace the
foundational training methods---but they do mitigate the most persistent
thoughts and habits that can prevent you from being your best self
moment to moment.

Presence
--------

Presence is foundational for mindfulness. By definition, being present
means we're paying attention to the people, objects, and ideas around
us. This level of attention is at the very core of managing focus and
awareness---the central characteristics of mindfulness---and maintaining
mental effectiveness.

**When we're present for others, we embody all three definitions of
present : we're here and in this moment as a gift for other people.
Instead of hopping on the neural carousel, be fully present when you're
with other people. Be fully present with your tasks. Be fully present
with challenges when they occur. Being present in the moment doesn't
require a change in what you do . It requires a change in how you pay
attention to what you do. It's a conscious decision to be present in the
moment.**

Patience
--------

**"A moment of patience in a moment of anger saves you a thousand
moments of regret."**

Patience involves choosing to stay calm in the face of challenging
situations, even when our fight or flight reflex might already be
triggered. It's the ability to endure unpleasantness, to confront the
situation directly and handle it sensibly, rather than on impulse.
Patience is more concerned with larger goals than temporary, quick-fix
solutions.

Patience is the direct path to living a more effective life that's
focused on the roots of problems instead of the symptoms.

Kindness
--------

What do we need from other people to be happy? Often the answer is
simple: things like presence, attention, respect, understanding, and
acceptance. What do other people need from us to be happy? The exact
same things. In this way, we're all experts in making each other happy.

Beginners mind
--------------

In my experience, looking anew is foundational for business success.
Without the ability to do so, we default to yesterday's perception of
the market and the competition. We become complacent---and might just
wake up to find ourselves behind the bus.

A few natural traits stand between each of us and a beginner's mind:
namely, habitual perception and cognitive rigidity.

The automatic association between what's actually in front of you and
what you've seen in the past---the neurological process called habitual
perception---can be problematic. It means you often don't actually see
what's right there in front of you. In fact, what you do see has much
less to do with actual reality, and much more to do with the reality
your mind creates based on your history and habits. In other words, you
have programmed yourself to see reality in a certain way.

Cognitive rigidity---the inflexibility created by automatically
recalling our habitual perceptions---is not conducive to creativity. It
doesn't help us innovate. Or help us to see new solutions to old
challenges, let alone new solutions to new challenges.

The ability to face reality as it is---or at least not be stuck in old
ways of seeing things---is the essence of a beginner's mind. Without a
beginner's mind, we lock ourselves inside our own experience; we
stagnate in our mind's habitual perception. With a beginner's mind, we
see things with fresh eyes and an open mind.

Challenge yourself to be more curious in your day-to-day activities. Be
open to what is happening to you moment to moment. The less you presume
to know, the more your mind will open.

Acceptance
----------

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_MIndfullness_at_work/media/image15.png)

Balance
-------

When you stop yourself from following an impulse---say, quitting after
one serving of your favorite food or drink---serotonin balances out the
dopamine release. In your daily mindfulness training, you're constantly
resisting impulses to follow distracting thoughts or hold onto stress.

Consciously identify the tasks at work that bring your instant
gratification---say answering an e-mail or text. Now identify the tasks
that bring discomfort. This may be fielding com- plaints from customers
or confronting a surly coworker. Be aware of your reactions to these
tasks and temper those reac- tions by purposefully limiting or delaying
the gratification of the experiences you like, while more actively
confronting the experiences you dislike.

You train balance by being aware of your reaction to everything you
experience, good, bad, and neutral. Notice the experiences you like and
those you do not like, things where you experience attraction and things
where you experience aversion. Just being aware of these reactions will
lead to change. When you become aware of a desire, the desire will
lessen as it's replaced by awareness of the desire. When you become
aware of resistance, the resistance will lessen as it's replaced by
awareness of it. If something is pleasant and nice, you observe it
neutrally without giving it more value or holding onto it. If something
is unpleasant, you observe it neutrally without wanting it to disappear.

Joy
---

Joy boosts our energy and performance; it enhances our ability to do
good work and excel at business. Like all feelings, joy is something we
can enable inside ourselves. Our nervous system reacts to our state of
mind. What we feel mentally has a significant effect on our physical
body.

Quite simply, joy equates to taking better care of both body and mind.
When we're happy doing something, we expand both our mental and physical
resources.

Letting go
----------

When you identify an issue or problem that seems to stay with you, to
follow you from task to task or from work to home, mentally hold on to
it. Isolate the initial thought before the related thoughts begin to
multiply. Then after you isolate it and observe it, let it pass. And
instead, purposefully refocus on what's happening in the moment.

Use the quality of relaxation to help you let go of your thoughts. When
you think, you create tension in your body. When you relax your body,
you also relax your thoughts. Relax your body and allow a natural mental
relaxation to follow. Then, use your focus on the experience of
breathing to help you let go of thoughts and be in the moment---one
breath at a time. As you begin to explore the nature of your thoughts,
you will notice that some can be very difficult to let go of. Consider
seeing these as opportunities to rewire your brain to let go more
easily. Every time one of these difficult thoughts comes up, notice the
thought is there and see if you can let it go or not.

Foundational practices
======================

Mindfulness training is an investment. It takes time. And it takes
effort. And while many would argue they have no time for mindfulness
training because they are busy, I see it very differently. Mindfulness
training is increasingly important to me, the busier I get. The more
things I need to do, the more time I train. That's my way of ensuring I
can stay focused, calm, and effective and not let the busyness clutter
my mind.

Training sharp focus
--------------------

Sharp focus is the ability to concentrate on thoughts and tasks of your
choice, without feeling the need to indulge each and every distraction
that passes through your mind. Having this sort of mental clarity can
help the busiest of us thrive, even in high-pressure environments filled
with distractions.

The ABCD Method
---------------

Mindfulness training is not passive. It's an active intervention in your
brain's neural network. For every moment you maintain focus, you create
new "focus" neural connections and abilities. Thanks to neuroplasticity,
the more you train, the stronger these neural connections and pathways
become---and the easier it becomes to stay focused.

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_MIndfullness_at_work/media/image16.png)

### Anatomy: Finding the Right Posture

-   Sit on a chair with both feet planted firmly on the floor.

-   Find balance. Don't lean back, forward, or to either side.

-   Sit with your back straight, but relaxed. Sitting up straight will
    help you to stay awake and alert.

-   Relax your body as much as you can. Pay special attention to your
    neck, shoulders, and arms---the places where many of us carry
    tension. Take time to release any tension you may feel. If it helps,
    roll your neck or move your shoulders up and down a few times. Also,
    take a deep breath and relax as you breathe out.

-   Place your hands on your knees or in your lap.

-   Close your eyes. If you start to doze off, open your eyes a little.
    Letting a small amount of light in activates your nervous sys- tem.
    If you opt to keep your eyes open, look down at the floor in front
    of you with a soft gaze.

-   Breathe in and out through your nose.

You may find it helps to scan your body for tension, releasing it every-
where you notice it, for the first few minutes of your training---or as
long as it takes to feel alert but relaxed. In this way, you will
gradually develop a more relaxed body. And a more relaxed body lays the
groundwork for a more relaxed mind, both prerequisites for training
sharp focus.

### Breathing: The Anchor for Attention

-   Focus your full attention on the experience of breathing. Be aware
    of how your stomach expands when you breathe in and contracts when
    you breathe out.

-   If focusing on your belly doesn't feel natural, try observing your
    breathing at the nostrils. Pay attention to the air flowing in and
    out of your nose.

-   Let the observation of your breath be neutral and effortless. You
    don't need to breathe deeply or slowly. You don't need to manipulate
    or change it. You don't have to get involved in it in any way.
    Observe it in the same way you would waves rolling in to beach. You
    don't try to control the waves---you just watch. While it can be
    challenging, neutral observation is very important as we go further
    into the training.

### Counting for Focus

-   Breathe in. Breathe out. When you finish breathing out, count "one."
    A short and succinct mental count. Breathe in again, out again, and
    count "two." Carry on in the same way until you get to ten, then
    count backward to one. Repeat this cycle

![](C:\scripts\dirkswiki\docs\Personal_Development\media_MIndfullness_at_work/media/image17.png)

-   If you have trouble counting higher than three or seven without
    losing focus, don't worry. The point of counting is not to see how
    many times you get through the cycle; rather, it's a tool to help
    you maintain focus.

-   If you suddenly find yourself at, you've been counting on autopilot
    and are not managing your attention. Start again at one. In the same
    way, if you find you've stopped counting altogether, simply start
    again at one.

-   If you find thoughts sneaking in between numbers, that's a sign
    you're not fully focused on your breath. Sharpen your focus on your
    breath and give it your full attention, in a relaxed manner.

If counting, or any other specific tactic gets in the way, don't get
upset. Instead, be grateful that you've recognized what doesn't work for
you and see it as an opportunity to make your own training more
effective.

### Distractions: Relax, Release, Return

Distractions are your best friends in focus training. Distractions are
the ones telling you when you are off track. What is a distraction?
Basically anything that is not your breath is a distraction. And they
can come from six sources: smell, taste, bodily sensations, sight,
sounds, and the mind itself. Regardless of where the distraction comes
from, the instructions for dealing with it are the same: Relax, Release,
and Return.

-   Relax: When you perceive you are distracted by a thought, sound, or
    sensation, notice whether it creates any tension any- where in your
    body. Try your best to release that tension. Relax. Recognize the
    fact that you have been distracted. It's really not the end of the
    world. Instead of getting frustrated or annoyed, think of that
    distraction as a good friend---one who gently reminds you that your
    attention has drifted. Treat every time you notice yourself being
    distracted as a moment to celebrate. After all, when you are aware
    that your mind has drifted, you are being mindful!

-   Release: Release whatever distraction you may encounter, simply by
    redirecting your focus toward your breath. Your full focus One
    Second Ahead can only be in one place at a time. If you choose your
    breath, the distraction is gradually released. Let go of the
    distraction gratefully, it helped you notice the fact that you had
    lost track of your breathing.

-   Return: Once you have released the distraction and regained a sense
    of relaxation, come back to your breathing with renewed focus and
    awareness.

You'll likely find focus training is a continual back and forth between
paying attention to your breathing and being distracted. Some days,
there will be more distractions than focus. Other days, there will be
more focus than distraction.

Remember, the objective is not to sit without distractions. If it were,
none of us would succeed. The objective is to be aware of the fact that
you're distracted and to acknowledge that you have the ability to regain
your focus on your breath. It's the conscious placing of our attention
that's critical to training sharp focus.

The Three Core Qualities of Mindfulness: Relaxation, Focus, and Clarity
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

### Overcome Tension with Relaxation

When you practice mindfulness, you may find yourself caught up in this
neurological "performance mode." It may seem almost unnatural to sit
still, especially with so many tasks that need to be done. In the spirit
of performance, you may push yourself to follow training instructions
with- out truly understanding their greater purpose. But wanting to be
"good at" mindfulness so you can get it over with---and assume the
benefits of a high-performing mind as soon as possible---won't get you
very far.

-   When you breathe in, scan your body to identify points where you are
    experiencing tension. When you breathe out, pay attention to that
    point and allow the tension to release.

-   Let the tension be released with the breath. It may be necessary to
    repeat the exercise several times to be effective. Take as much time
    as needed with each tension point before moving on to the next point
    where you find tension.

-   Keep in mind the following definition: "Relaxation is the absence of
    unnecessary effort." Scan your body for any unnecessary effort and
    gently let it go.

-   Scan and release tension in your body for the first minute of your
    training or as long as it takes to increase your ability to be alert
    but relaxed. In this way you will gradually develop a more relaxed
    body and mind.

### Overcome Overactivity with Focus

A focused mind does not wander. A focused mind can stay focused on an
object of choice. But sometimes our minds can be overactive, wandering
in every possible direction or following every distraction that arises.

-   In many instances, the natural response to an excited mind is
    frustration, and the result is to try to force greater attention on
    your breath. Although applying such force may help you Training
    Sharp Focus maintain focus, it will be exhausting and
    counterproductive to creating a calm and clear mind. The first
    response to an overactive and distracted mind is to relax.

-   The alternative strategy for increasing focus is to actually let go
    of performance expectations. Let your breath hold your attention.
    Your breathing works by itself. Every in-breath is followed by an
    out-breath. Rest your full attention in this movement, effortlessly,
    as a neutral observer.

### Overcome Drowsiness with Clarity

-   When you experience drowsiness, you need to arouse your attention
    and increase alertness. You can do this by sitting up a little
    straighter or taking an intentionally deep breath. You can also open
    your eyes, keeping them pointed downward toward the floor to
    minimize distractions. One Second Ahead

-   Another strategy to increase clarity is to arouse a deep sense of
    curiosity in the natural experience of breathing. Experience each
    breath as a new experience. Be curious about the subtle detail of
    your breath: Where do you notice it? How does it feel? What's it
    doing?

<!-- -->

-   When you first experience any sense of drowsiness, increase your
    alertness. Don't let the dullness take hold. Be purposeful and
    intentional in your training. With time, it gets easier. You will
    notice the warning signs earlier and be able to stay clear before
    drowsiness takes hold.

Ultimately, mindfulness training is not about being able to sit still
and maintain focus on your breath. It's about improving your ability to
focus on the most important facets of your life: your work, your
coworkers, and your family. Most people notice the greatest impact in
these areas after just a few weeks. Try to relax and enjoy the benefits
you're experiencing---even if, in the beginning, this is just ten
minutes of space, stillness, and peace in your life.

 From Sharp Focus to Open Awareness
----------------------------------

In training open awareness, as explored in the next chapter, you go a
step further. During open awareness training, a sharpened focus helps
generate insight into both the nature of the mind and how its
performance can be optimized. With open awareness training, you develop
a panoramic view that helps you see yourself, others, and every
situation more objectively---allowing you to decide who and what gets
your attention, and who and what does not.

Open awareness is the ability to observe your mind. It is training in
becoming familiar with the workings of the mind and how that causes us
to experience challenges in life. Open awareness helps you not be a
victim of circumstance---only able to react automatically to situations
as they develop. Open awareness involves training for a new kind of
relationship with your thoughts and the world around you. It engenders
certain clarity in the mind, allowing you to stay one second ahead of
your reactions, regardless of the situation. With open awareness,
autopilot is no longer the default response mechanism. Instead, it
catalyzes the ability to relate to the events in your mind, bringing a
whole new sense of clarity and direction into your life and work.

**Training open awareness provides you with the opportunity to
experience, with a depth of understanding, that your thoughts are the
root cause of your problems.**

Open awareness gives sharp focus direction and intentionality. Together,
sharp focus and open awareness can help you spend your time, energy, and
attention mindfully, ultimately increasing your effectiveness in life
and work.

**The essence of open awareness training is observing your thoughts,
senses, emotions and tasks in a neutral way---like a mental
observatory.**

-   As in focus training, start by sitting comfortably, as described
    under the guidance in the "A" for Anatomy.

-   For a minute or two, direct your full attention toward your
    breathing, like in the focus training. Allow your mind to stabilize
    and settle. Count your breaths if it helps you let go of
    distractions. Check off one by one whether your mind has the three
    core qualities of relaxation, focus, and clarity.

-   When you've reached some level of these qualities, you can begin to
    open your awareness.

-   Let go of the attention on your breathing and open up to whatever
    may arise. When the first distraction attracts your attention---a
    sound, thought, physical sensation, or anything else---direct your
    full attention to it and use it as an anchor for your awareness.

-   Observe the distraction neutrally, just as you did with your
    breathing. Don't think about it. Don't engage in it. Don't try to
    make it stay or go away. Simply observe it. If it helps, imagine
    observing the distractions as if they were waves on the beach.

-   Notice when the distraction comes into focus. Notice that it's
    there. Notice when at some point it disappears or changes to
    something else.

-   When a distraction disappears, you open up and are ready to receive
    the next one in the same way. If a distraction changes into
    something else, you follow the transformation neutrally.

-   If at any point you find you're confused or overwhelmed by your
    distractions, pause, relax, release the distractions, and return
    your focus to your breath. After a few moments, when you've
    stabilized your focus, let go of your breathing and open your
    awareness again.

-   At any time, you can always come back to the anchor and simply focus
    on your breath. Be prepared that you may need to come back to your
    breath again and again throughout your training to ensure you're not
    getting carried away by thoughts and distractions.

-   If it's difficult to have a neutral approach to the distraction,
    that is, if you notice you start to engage with it, it can be
    helpful to give it a short mental label. For example, if a thought
    arises about something you need to buy, you can label it "shopping"
    and observe the experience of the thought without thinking about
    what it is and where you will get it. You can also use even simpler
    labels such as "thought," "sensation," and "feeling," without
    qualifiers.

While the instructions are simple, the challenge for many is observing
thoughts, feelings, sensations, and emotions neutrally without engaging.
In fact, many find training open awareness difficult, especially in the
beginning.

**Use open awareness as a basis for your training for a couple of weeks
as you develop your ability to be a neutral observer of your thoughts
and experiences. When you feel able to respond to distractions
deliberately rather than react automatically, you can move to the next
level of open awareness training that includes the three insights
outlined below.**

### Insight \#1: Everything Changes

Rationally, we understand that even the most frustrating situation will
eventually change. Even so, the mind has a tendency to hold on to
difficult situations as if they will always be there.

The first insight of open awareness is about developing an instinctive
understanding that everything changes, that everything is transitory.
Everything. The more you come to grasp, in a meaningful way, the fact
that everything changes, the easier it becomes to deal with negative
things, because you know they will change. You will also place a higher
value on the positive things you experience, appreciating them more
while they last. In your training, and in life, when observing your
distractions, regardless of what they are, ask yourself the following
questions:

-   Is there anything you experience that is unchanging?

-   Is there a thought that never goes away?

-   Is there anything solid and static, or is it all a process?

### Insight \#2: Happiness Is a Choice

Similarly, the situations we experience don't cause frustration or anger
on their own. Rather, it's the way we relate to our surroundings that
creates the problems we perceive in life. Regardless of external
circumstances, we are the source of our own happiness or frustration. By
changing our worldview, we have the potential to free ourselves from the
problems we create.

**"We all have two wolves inside us. One is bad and feels anger,
jealousy, envy, falsehoods, and arrogance. The other is good and feels
love, empathy, honesty, generosity, and humility. The two wolves
constantly fight each other." One of the grandchildren asks, "But which
one wins?" "The one you feed," the old man answers.**

### Insight \#3: Everything Is Potential

The insight that everything is potential and that there is no solid,
isolated self means we can redefine ourselves. We can break free of our
own limited definitions of ourselves and others. New possibilities open
up in every situation we encounter. Nothing is fixed. We have the choice
to define all people and all situations based on our perspectives,
however narrow or expansive they may be. When everything is potential,
it offers each and every one of us an abundance of opportunities and
positive outcomes.

Mastering Your Life---Next Steps 
=================================

The minutes that you sit training your focus or awareness may be the
only few minutes of the day that are really yours. Allow yourself to
rest in these precious moments. It's your time. It's your mind. It's
your life.

How Long and How Often to Train
-------------------------------

In my experience of guiding many people from a wide range of cultures, a
minimum of ten minutes a day of mindfulness training ensures good
results. As you gradually develop, you can increase the duration as much
as you like. The more you do it, the more you'll get out of it. Just
like with physical exercise, more time spent training equates to greater
outcomes.

In terms of frequency, I recommend you set aside time every day to
practice. Daily training is the best way to get results. When you do it
every day, it will become a habit.

In my experience, the morning is a good time for most people. The mind
is fresh, and therefore you get more out of the training. In addition,
when you spend ten minutes at the start of the day to consciously be
focused and aware, it has a strong influence on the rest of the day.

Self-Directed Mindfulness Program
---------------------------------

The following are the most basic guidelines for a ten week self-directed
training program.

Each week you:

-   Undertake ten minutes of sharp focus or open awareness training on a
    daily basis;

-   Select a mental strategy from Part II;

-   Select one or two workplace techniques from Part I.

This program begins with focus training because it's the foundation for
all the other elements. Only after you've developed a substantial level
of focus---typically after four to five weeks of daily training---
should you move on to awareness training. After the ten weeks, you'll
have experienced both types of training and can choose the one you
prefer.
