The School of Life An Emotional Education by Alain de Botton

The slowest among us can, in a few hours, pick up ideas that it took a
few rare geniuses a lifetime to acquire. What is distinctive is just how
selective we are about the topics we deem it possible to educate
ourselves *in*. Our energies are overwhelmingly directed towards
material, scientific and technical subjects -- and away from
psychological and emotional ones, very little around their abilities at
marriage or kindness.

The assumption is that emotional insight might be either unnecessary or
in essence unteachable, lying beyond reason or method. We are left to
find our own path around our unfeasibly complicated minds -- a move as
striking (and as wise) as suggesting that each generation should
rediscover the laws of physics by themselves.

School of life
--------------

In an ideal society, it would be not only children who were known to
need an education. All adults would recognize that they inevitably
required continuing education of an emotional kind and would remain
active followers of a psychological curriculum. Schools devoted to
emotional intelligence would be open for everyone, so that children
would feel that they were participating in the early stages of a
lifelong process.

Emotional intelligence
----------------------

We are referring to their ability to introspect and communicate, to read
the moods of others, to relate with patience, charity and imagination.
The temptation can be to insist that our ideas must solely be the
offspring of reason. A wiser interpretation would be that most of what
passes through our minds is in some way dependent on particular things
going on in our bodies.

Moods show up and insist that they are telling us total certainties
about our identities and our prospects -- perhaps that our love lives
will never work out or that a professional situation is beyond repair.
Still, we always have an option of calling their bluff, of realising
that they are only a passing state of mind-- and that we could, with
courage, politely ignore them and change the subject. We might
recognise, but not give way to, a mood and put a bit of distance between
it and our conscious selves. We might, at times, even do precisely what
a mood commands us not to do: see someone rather than cede to shame,
show our face rather than give way to paranoia, go out for a walk rather
than fold our limbs into the foetal position.

Our low moods are far more about a past we still need to mourn fully
than a future that there is any reason to dread.

We could picture our minds like a theatre, much of it sunk in darkness,
with a brightly illuminated lectern and microphone at the centre of the
stage. At different moments of our days and nights, contrasting
characters will seek to step up to speak and interpret the world
unfolding before our eyes. What unites these characters is that they
are, in their diverse ways, very keen to speak and very, very unhelpful.
All we need to do, at important moments when our other inner characters
will be rushing to get to the microphone of the mind, is to hold them
all back purposefully, breathe deeply and ask ourselves one simple but
categorical question: what would the adult say here?

Treats of EI:

-   knows that love is a skill, not a feeling, and will require trust,
    vulnerability, generosity, humour, sexual understanding and
    selective resignation.

-   takes time to determine what gives their working life meaning and
    has the confidence and tenacity to find an accommodation between
    their inner priorities and the demands of the world.

-   knows how to hope and be grateful, while remaining steadfast before
    the essentially tragic structure of existence

-   knows that they will only ever be mentally healthy in a few areas
    and at certain moments, but is committed to fathoming their
    inadequacies and warning others of them in good time, with apology
    and charm.

### Emotional maturity (communication, trust, vulnerability)

-   Capacity to stay calm

-   Capacity to explain

-   Capacity to be vulnerable

Work
----

The values we seek in meaningful job are:

-   Making use of our skills (challenging but not too challenging)

    -   Figure what you want and what you are good at

-   Helping others. Contributing something useful.

-   Seeing the direct impact of one's work to the above.

Business ideas are based on the simple idea to solve people's problems.
Think about a normal day and how to make it easier.

Jobs are created based on what we consume. What people consume does not
necessarily reflect our personal choices:

-   Businesses offer lots of choices to fulfil different people's
    desires.

-   We do not always want/chose the best options, in the sense of what
    is best for us, what educates us most, what is most healthy. Because
    we are exhausted.

Self-Help
---------

Religion used to be the authority on providing guidance if it comes to
emotional intelligence. There was an attempt, realizing the downfall of
religion, to replace religion by culture for this purpose, but it has
fallen short. Religion used art and ritual to convey messages through
beauty and repetition. A good 'school' shouldn't tell us only things
we've never heard of before; it should be deeply interested in
rehearsing all that is theoretically known yet practically forgotten.

Human condition
---------------

Humans are by nature inherently flawed beings. It helps to understand
this and not try to fix this or think that we can be perfect instead we
should develop compassion towards us and others because of this.

They (the sane insane) can -- at their best -- be drily funny about the
tragedy of being human. They lay bare the fears, doubts, longings,
desires and habits that don't belong to the story we commonly tell
ourselves about who we are.

The sane insane among us are not a special category of the mentally
unwell; they represent the most evolved possibility for a mature human
being.

**Many things that we might assume to be uniquely odd or disconcertingly
strange about us are in reality wholly ubiquitous, though simply rarely
spoken of in the reserved and cautious public sphere.**

Melancholy
----------

Melancholy is not rage or bitterness or sarcasm it is a noble species of
sadness that arises when we are properly open to the idea that suffering
and disappointment are at the heart of human experience. It is not a
disorder that needs to be cured; it is a tender-hearted, calm,
dispassionate acknowledgement of how much agony we will inevitably have
to travel through.

Decision making
---------------

Think of every issue through the eyes of your

-   Enemy

    -   Enemies know our failures

    -   Do the opposite than an enemy would love you to do

-   Gut

    -   Be brave and open enough to discover your gut feeling

    -   Be reasonable enough to follow your gut feeling immediately but
        take it into consideration

-   Death

    -   Death is the only certainty in life.

    -   Makes us less concerned about consequences or smaller obstacles.

-   Caution

    -   Consider potential downsides and risks

    -   Are there other options

    -   Which opportunities can't be realized by following this.

-   Courage

    -   Don't do what others think is right

    -   Do the unexpected.

Simple truths
-------------

-   we should understand rather than condemn

-   others are primarily anxious rather than cruel

-   every strength of character we admire bears with it a weakness we
    must forgive

Self-knowledge
==============

A casual acquaintance may, in a few minutes of conversation, deduce more
about our psyches than we have been able to determine across many
decades. We are frequently the very last people to know what is at work
within 'us'.

We suffer because there is no easy route to introspection.

We pay a very high price for our self-ignorance. Feelings and desires
that haven't been examined linger and distribute their energy randomly
across our lives. Ambition that doesn't know itself re-emerges as panic;
envy transforms itself into bitterness; anger turns into rage; sadness
into depression. Disavowed material buckles and strains the system. We
develop pernicious tics: a facial twitch, impotence, a compulsion, an
unbudgeable sadness. Much of what destroys our lives can be attributed
to emotions that our conscious selves haven't found a way to understand
or to address in time.

Childhood
---------

Our species' offspring is born very helpless and remains very dependent
for many years, as compared to many other species. The dependence is
physical and emotional. It doesn't take major blunders to cause damage
in a child's emotional well being that can last a lifetime.

We are a certain way because we were knocked off a more fulfilling
trajectory years ago. In the face of a viciously competitive parent, we
took refuge in underachievement. Having lived around a parent disgusted
by the body, sex became frightening. Surrounded by material
unreliability, we had to overachieve in relation to money and social
prestige. Hurt by a dismissive parent, we fell into patterns of
emotional avoidance. A volatile parent pushed us towards our present
meekness. Early overprotectiveness inspired timidity and, around any
complex situation, panic. A continually busy, inattentive parent was the
catalyst for a personality marked by exhausting attention-seeking
behaviour.

The wounds caused by experiences from childhood should be addressed by
putting yourself in the mindset of yourself as a kid and re-evaluating
the childhood experience with a more mature mindset than at the time it
was experienced.

The origin of the voice of the inner judge is simple to trace: it is an
internalization of the voices of people who were once outside us. We
absorb the tones of contempt and indifference or charity and warmth that
we will have heard across our formative years. Sometimes a voice is
positive and benign, encouraging us to run those final few yards. But
frequently the inner voice is not very nice at all. It is defeatist and
punitive, panic-ridden and humiliating. It doesn't represent anything
like our best insights or most mature capacities.

**An inner voice was always an outer voice that we have -- imperceptibly
-- made our own.**

**A good internal voice is rather like (and just as important as) a
genuinely decent judge: someone who can separate good from bad but who
will always be merciful, fair, accurate in understanding what's going on
and interested in helping us deal with our problems. It's not that we
should stop judging ourselves, rather that we should learn to be better
judges of ourselves.**

**The best way to change the inner voice is by adapting another external
voice that has those characteristics, internalize and rehearse it during
judgements.**

EMOTIONALLY HEALTHY CHILDHOOD
-----------------------------

In an emotionally healthy childhood,...

-   ... someone will put themselves profoundly at our service.

-   ... we're given the benefit of the doubt. We are assessed by what we
    might one day be, not by exactly what we are right now. Someone is
    on hand to put the best possible spin on our behaviour. Someone is
    kind.

-   ... the relationship with our caregiver is steady, consistent and
    long-term. We trust that they will be there tomorrow and the day
    after. They are boringly predictable.

-   ... we aren't always required to be wholly good boys or girls. We
    are allowed to get furious and sometimes a bit revolting -- at
    certain points to say 'absolutely not' and 'because I feel like it'.
    The adults know their own flaws and do not expect a child to be
    fundamentally better than they are.

-   our carer isn't jealous of or competitive with us. They can allow
    themselves to be overtaken and superseded. They have had their
    moment in the limelight, or are having it elsewhere beyond the
    family.

-   ... the child learns that things which break can be fixed. Plans can
    go awry, but new ones can be made. You can fall over and start anew.
    A voice of resilience, originally external, becomes the way the
    child learns to speak to themselves. There are alternatives to
    panic.

-   plenty goes wrong. No one has staked their reputation on rendering
    the whole story perfect. The carer does not see it as their role to
    remove every frustration. They intuit that a lot of good comes from
    having the right, manageable kind of friction, through which the
    child develops their own resources and individuality.

-   the child can see that the good carer isn't either entirely good or
    wholly bad and so isn't worthy of either idealization or
    denigration. The child accepts the faults and virtues of the carer
    with melancholy maturity and gratitude -- and in doing so, by
    extension, becomes ready to accept that everyone they like will be a
    mixture of the positive and the negative.

Others
======

Be Kind and forgiving
---------------------

Provide people with kindness. Provide people with positive
interpretations of their blunders by revealing the underlying positive
motivations. Consider that no one is intentionally bad and there is
always something else underneath.

We should interpret people's weaknesses as the inevitable downside of
certain merits that drew us to them, and from which we will benefit at
other points (even if none of these benefits are apparent right now).
What we're seeing are not their faults, pure and simple, but rather the
shadow side of things that are genuinely good about them. Every weakness
can be connected to a strength.

pedantic and uncompromising -\> thoroughness and honesty

messiness -\> creative enthusiasm.

One of the fundamental paths to sympathy is the power to hold on, in the
most challenging situations, to a distinction between a person's overt
unpleasant actions and the more pitiable motives that may underlie them.
Pure evil is seldom at work.

**Almost all our worst moments can be traced back to an unexotic,
bathetic, temptingly neglected ingredient: pain.**

One has to feel very small in order to belittle.

Be polite and considerate and praise people
-------------------------------------------

The polite person starts from the assumption that others are highly
likely to be in quite different places internally, whatever the outward
signs. Their behaviour is therefore tentative, wary and filled with
enquiries. They will explicitly check with others to take a measure of
their experiences and outlook: if they feel cold, they are very alive to
the possibility that you may be feeling perfectly warm and so will take
trouble to ask if you'd mind if they went over and closed the window.

Partnership
-----------

Truth about sex that are usually left unspoken:

-   It's very rare to maintain sexual interest in only one person,
    however much one loves them, beyond a certain time;

-   it's entirely possible to love one's partner and regularly want to
    have sex with strangers, frequently types who don't align with our
    ordinary concerns;

-   one can be a kind, respectable and democratic person and at the same
    time want to inflict or receive very rough treatment;

-   it's highly normal to have fantasies about scenarios one would not
    wish to act out in reality and that might involve illegal, violent,
    hurtful and unsanitary aspects;

-   it may be easier to be excited by someone one dislikes or thinks
    nothing of than by someone one loves.

We are, via sex, seeking to connect emotionally with, and make ourselves
understood by, another person.

Beneath the surface of almost every argument lies a forlorn attempt by
two people to get the other to see, acknowledge and respond to their
emotional reality and sense of justice. Beyond the invective is a
longing that our partner should witness, understand and endorse some
crucial element of our own experience.

It is ultimately no great sign of kindness to insist on showing someone
our entire selves at all times. A dedication to maintaining boundaries
and editing our pronouncements belongs to love as much as a capacity to
show ourselves as we really are. The lover who does not tolerate
secrets, who in the name of 'being honest' divulges information so
wounding it cannot be forgotten, is no friend of love. Just as no parent
should ever tell a child the whole truth, so we should accept the
ongoing need to edit our full reality.

The world doesn't revolve around us, in the bigger scheme of things we
are just a tiny speck. Nature can help us to see and set things in
perspective.

We want to be understood for being the mad animals we are, and then
comforted and reassured that it will all be OK anyway.

Confidence
----------

At the heart of our under-confidence is a skewed picture of how
dignified a normal person can be. We imagine that it might be possible
to place ourselves permanently beyond mockery. We trust that it is an
option to lead a good life without regularly making a wholehearted idiot
of ourselves.

The way to greater confidence isn't to reassure ourselves of our own
dignity; it's to live at peace with the inevitable nature of our
ridiculousness.

We know ourselves from the inside, but others only from the outside.
We're constantly aware of all our anxieties and doubts from within, yet
all we know of others is what they happen to do and tell us, a far
narrower and more edited source of information. We are very often left
to conclude that we must be at the more freakish, revolting end of human
nature.

Misc
----

The price of something is principally determined by what it cost to
make, not how much human value is potentially to be derived from it.

There are two ways to get richer: one is to make more money and the
second is to discover that more of the things we could love are already
to hand (thanks to the miracles of the Industrial Revolution). We are,
astonishingly, already a good deal richer than we're encouraged to think
we are.

Manhood
-------

Moving from playing it cool (neglecting one\'s vulnerabilities) to be
aware and admitting of our vulnerabilities but also being able to handle
our own psychological deficiencies.

Wisdom
------

We are operating with essentially the same piece of mental hardware as
was used by Aristotle, the Buddha and Shakespeare. We are better read
and better informed than they ever were -- and our tools are similar.
The crucial ingredient lies neither in mental equipment nor in training,
but in what a person can allow themselves to believe they are capable
of; the limiting factor is mental low self-esteem. be realistic about
what it takes and don't expect things to go easy most of the time.

The confidence to imagine that we might know some things that haven't
yet entered the consciousness of others is crucial to our capacity to
stick by and develop insights of brilliance.

-   Appreciate when things do go right. Recognize the beauty of smaller
    things.

-   Budget for madness, be unsurprised by mood swings and irrationality.

-   Take live with humour.

-   Trade honesty with politeness, be aware of how different things can
    look through the eyes of others.

-   Accept yourself with all your flaws.

-   Be slow to anger and judge. Consider good intentions.

-   Forgive

-   Don't envy and appreciate the role of luck.

-   
