**Einstein put it this way: "A clever person solves a problem. A wise
person avoids it."**

## The Fine Art of correction

Don't overdo planning but adjust as you go.

We've got to get rid of the stigma attached to correction. People who
self-correct early on have an advantage over those who spend ages
fiddling with the perfect set-up and crossing their fingers that their
plans will work out. There's no such thing as the ideal training.
There's more than one life goal. There's no perfect business strategy,
no optimal stock portfolio, no one right job. They're all myths. The
truth is that you begin with one set-up and then constantly adjust it.
The more complicated the world becomes, the less important your starting
point is. So don't invest all your resources into the perfect
set-up---at work or in your personal life. Instead, practice the art of
correction by revising the things that aren't quite working---swiftly
and without feeling guilty.

## The Pledge

When it comes to important issues, flexibility isn't an advantage---it's
a trap.

Two reasons. First: constantly having to make new decisions situation by
situation saps your willpower. *Decision fatigue* is the technical term
for this. A brain exhausted by decision-making will plump for the most
convenient option, which more often than not is also the worst one.

The second reason inflexibility is so valuable has to do with
reputation. By being consistent on certain topics, you signal where you
stand and establish the areas where there's no room for negotiation. You
communicate self-mastery, making yourself less vulnerable to attack.

## Black Box Thinking

Learn from errors through reflection (record previous sequence of events
like a black-box). Radical acceptance of the objective truth + rectify
mistakes.

## Counterproductivity

Considering a holistic view lots of productivity tools are actually
counterproductive since we spend in the end more money time on
maintaining/setting up the gadgets.

## Do Nothing Wrong and the Right Thing Will Happen 

Focus on avoiding mistakes/negative things rather than doing everything
right.

when we ask what factors have a significant *negative* impact on the
*good life* we can pinpoint them exactly: alcoholism, drug addiction,
chronic stress, noise, a lengthy commute, a job you despise,
unemployment, a dysfunctional marriage, stupidly high expectations,
poverty, debt and financial dependence, loneliness, spending too much
time with moaning Minnies, overreliance on external validation, constant
self-comparisons with others, thinking like a victim, self-loathing,
chronic sleep deprivation, depression, anxiety, rage and envy.

"All I want to know is where I'm going to die, so I'll never go there."
-- Munger

## The ovarian lottery

Most of the things achieved are mainly a matter of luck (your genes,
your family, where you were born)

**So take other people's feelings very seriously, but not your own. Let
them flit through you---they'll come and go anyway, just as they
please.**

**Focus on what you are good at (circle of competence)**

## Why our sample sizes are too small

Let's say you want to hire a secretary (sorry: a PA). A hundred women
have applied for the role, and you're interviewing them one by one in
random order. After each interview, you have to make a decision: will I
hire or reject this candidate? No sleeping on it, no putting it off
until you've seen all the applicants. The decision you make straight
after the interview cannot be overridden. How do you proceed?

This question is known among mathematicians by a politically incorrect
label: the *secretary problem*. Surprisingly, there is only one optimal
solution. You should interview the first thirty-seven candidates and
reject them all; meanwhile, however, you should be monitoring their
quality. Then keep interviewing until you find someone who is better
than the top applicant out of the previous thirty-seven. Hire her.
You'll be making an excellent decision. She may not be the very *best*
of the hundred applicants, but she's sure to be a solid choice. Every
other approach has been shown to produce statistically worse results.

What is it about the number thirty-seven? Thirty-seven is 100 divided by
the mathematical constant *e* (2.718). If you had only fifty applicants,
you would turn down the first eighteen (50/*e*) then hire the first
candidate who was better than anyone out of the previous eighteen.

The world is much bigger, richer and more diverse than we imagine, so
try to take as many samples as you can while you're still young. Your
first years of adulthood aren't about earning money or building a
career. They're about getting acquainted with the universe of
possibility. Be extremely receptive. Taste whatever fate dishes up. Read
widely, because novels and short stories are excellent simulations of
life. Only as you age should you adapt your modus operandi and become
highly selective. By then you'll know what you like and what you don't.
