## A Brief Survey of World Religions {#a-brief-survey-of-world-religions}

### Hinduism {#hinduism}

Hinduism is the term used to designate the complex mosaic of religious beliefs and practices of the vast majority of the people of India.

*   One of the oldest living religions in the world
*   No single founder but evolved over a period of four thousand years, its history interwoven with **religious and cultural** movements.
*   Hindu -&gt; Sanskrit word sindu for river (Hindu referring to the Indus River)
*   Alternative term for Hinduism preferred today is Sanatana Dharma.
    *   Sanatana -&gt; eternal religion
    *   Dharma embodies a holistic approach to both personal spiritual fulfillment and social harmony.
*   Many manifestations of single God assuming different forms.
*   Vedas -&gt; Ancient scriptures revered by Hindus. 4 parts
*   **Upanishads** -&gt; The philosophical part of the Vedas, intended only for serious seekers.
*   The Upanishads are thought to have developed between 600 and 400 B.C.E., about the same time that Gautama Buddha (c. 563 483 B.C.E.), the founder of Buddhism, lived on the Indian subcontinent.
*   Five main themes:
    *   **Contemplation of the luminous self.** Spiritual enlightenment can be achieved only by turning one’s attention inward to discover a transcendent reality from within. The bodily senses are made for looking outward and are easily enticed by sensory pleasures and worldly spectacles. But these sensations are fleeting and impermanent, passing away when one dies, and obscure the search for the infinite, everlasting reality. This unseen but all-pervading reality they called Brahman, the Unknowable. From Brahman originate the multiplicity of all forms, including humans, and thus Brahman can be discovered in the soul (atman) within ourselves.
    *   **Reincarnation.** The belief that the soul leaves the dead body and enters a new one, being born over and over in countless bodies. Whether the body is that of an animal or other life form, the self remains constant. But rebirth as a human being is a precious and rare opportunity for the soul to advance toward its ultimate goal of liberation from rebirth and merging with the Brahman.
    *   **Karma**. Progress toward a merging with Brahman is the result of karma, which refers to one’s actions as well as the consequences of one’s actions. The ultimate goal of creating ourselves through good choices is to escape from the karmic wheel of birth, death, and rebirth, which is called samsara. To escape from samsara is to achieve liberation from the limitations of space, time, and matter through realization of the immortal absolute.
    *   **Yogic practices**. Disciplines that clear the mind and support a state of serene, detached awareness. This desired state of balance, purity, and peacefulness of mind is described as sattvic, in contrast with active, restless states or lethargic dull states. The practices for increasing sattvic qualities are known collectively as yoga, from the Sanskrit word for union (in this case the union of body, mind, and spirit).
    *   **Fire sacrifices**

### Buddhism {#buddhism}

http://www.usna.edu/Users/history/abels/hh205/milinda.html

Nontheist religion that does **not believe in a super- natural God or Creator**. Instead, the **ultimate transformation** to which Buddhists aspire is to escape the world of suffering through our own efforts until we finally **achieve Nirvana** (the ultimate egoless state of bliss).

*   originator of Buddhism -&gt; Siddhartha Gautama
*   4 noble truths of suffering:
    *   **Life inevitably involves suffering, is imperfect and unsatisfactory**. Suffering and frustration is an unavoidable part of living- Happiness is fleeting, with unhappiness its constant shadow. Even the self is an impermanent illusion. The I is really a perpetually transient bundle of fleeting sensations, impressions, ideas, and feelings. The metaphor often used for the Buddhist concept of the self is that of a flame being passed from candle to candle in continual movement.
    *   **Suffering originates in our desires**. Desires are wishes for things to be different than they are. We wish for good health, riches and fame, eternal life, perpetual happiness, permanence and security, and many other things as well. But none of these wishes can be achieved in a permanent fashion because life and the universe are essentially impermanent. And because our wishes are continually thwarted and events in the world are beyond our control, frustration and suffering are unavoidable.
    *   **Suffering will cease if all desires cease**. This can be achieved only by realizing and accepting the fact that there is no unique, separate, permanent, immortal self. Once we understand that our self is simply an impermanent flow of energy tied to the larger energies of the cosmos, we are freed to realize that desires and suffering are irrelevant. In practical terms, accepting the non- existence of a permanent self encourages us to live happily and fully in the moment, liberated from self-centeredness and full of compassion for others.
    *   **There is a way to realize this state: the Noble Eightfold Path.** Extinguishing desire and suffering is a process that can be achieved by following the guidelines embodied in the Noble Eightfold Path, devoted to pursuing morality, focus, and wisdom. The Noble Eightfold Path is a systematic philosophy of life that enables people gradually to free themselves from desire and suffering and achieve the ultimate peace of Nirvana. This process typically extends over multiple lifetimes, as we are caught in the perpetual cycle of death and rebirth. Once again, the self is not a permanent, immortal entity but is akin to a flame being passed from moment to moment, lifetime to lifetime. The Noble Eightfold Path includes right understanding, right thought and motives, right mindfulness, and right mediation.

### Daoism/Taoism {#daoism-taoism}

At the time that India was giving birth to Hinduism and Buddhism, East Asia saw the creation of Daoism and Confucianism (in China) and Shinto (in Japan). Daoism, on the other hand, is a way of life inspired from the rhythms of natural phenomena. Daoism promotes a constant interaction with our environment and the importance of being aware of it.

Dao is believed to be the first cause of the universe. It is the unnamable and eternally real force that flows through life, and each believer s goal is to become one with the Dao. Although Dao can be translated as path or the way, it is basically indefinable. Reality cannot be named or known through language, logic, or concepts it must be experienced. Dao refers to a power that envelops and flows through all things, living and nonliving. The Dao regulates natural processes and balances the universe.

Daoists do not pray to a Supreme Being; instead, they seek answers to life s problems through inner meditation and observation. For the Daoist, time is cyclical, not linear as in Western thinking. The entire cosmos is a manifestation of an impersonal self-generating energy called qi (ch i). This force has two aspects whose interplay causes the ever-changing phenomena of the universe. Yin is the dark, receptive, female aspect; Yang is the bright, assertive, male aspect. The Yin is considered to be the breath that formed Earth, whereas the Yang is the breath that formed the heavens. These two forces symbolize the pairs of opposites that are seen throughout the universe, such as good and evil, light and dark, male and female. Wisdom lies in recognizing the ever-shifting, but regular and balanced, patterns of movement of Yin and Yang and moving along with them. The Dao is this creative rhythm of the universe. Daoists follow the art of wu-wei, which is to let nature take its course, rather than trying to impede it. To take a metaphor from the natural world, one should allow a river to flow toward the sea unimpeded, instead of erecting a dam that would interfere with its natural flow. Analogously, we should be like flowing water ourselves, bypassing and gently wearing away obstacles rather than aggressively attacking them, effortlessly moving through life without struggling, leaving all accomplishment behind without trying to hold on to them.

Even when difficulties arise, the Daoist does not panic and take unnecessary action. This is a philosophy that Daoists believe should be practiced on a social and political level as well.

### Judaism {#judaism}

Judaism traces its roots to about 3,800 years ago, when, according to the holy scriptures known col- lectively as the TaNaKh, God entered into a covenant with Abraham. According to the covenant, Abraham and his descendants would give God (Yah- weh) their exclusive devotion and obedience, and God would choose them to enjoy special consideration and protection (thus the idea that Jews are God’ s chosen people ). Jewish scripture also states that God promised Canaan (now Israel) to the Jews as their homeland.

First and foremost is monotheism, a belief in one Creator God, all-pow- erful, all-loving, and ever-present. In stories from scripture, this God demands obe- dience, metes out rewards and punishments, and issues a moral code (the Ten Commandments). Religious holidays and rituals are based on key events in Jewish history as recorded in Jewish scriptures. These events serve as moral paradigms, symbolically rich stories that have continued relevance to contemporary lives. Divinely inspired laws that cover every aspect of Jewish social, communal, and religious life are another core element of Jewish religious faith. These laws have been codified in the Torah, a word which has a variety of meanings. One meaning refers to the first five books of the TaNaKh, believed to be the word of God as told to Moses. These teachings have evolved over time through the ongoing study and writings of Jew- ish scholars.

### Christianity {#christianity}

Christianity emerged and split off from Judaism some 1,800 years after Abraham. At its core is the belief that Jesus is the son of God and savior whose sacrificial death and resurrection make it possible for souls to have eternal life in heaven. Chris- tian scriptures consist of the Hebrew TaNaKh, which Chris- tians refer to as the Old Testament, and the writings of Jesus s followers, known as the New Testament. Christianity is the largest of the world s religions, with approximately 2.1 billion adherents. The New Testament contains the teachings of Jesus, a Jew who lived in Palestine under Roman rule at the beginning of the first millennium C.E. Jesus describes God as a loving Father who will take care of those who love Him and want to follow the path of righteousness. Jesus message was to reveal this path, through words and actions, so that all could achieve spiritual perfection and salvation in preparation for life after death. He makes clear that each person s relationship with God is intensely personal, nurtured through worship, reflection, and personal prayer.

Jesus preached a radical ethic, focusing his attention on the most disinherited people of the day, including the poor, the outcasts, the prostitutes, and even the most despised people of the day, the Roman tax collectors. What s more, Jesus preached that, in the next life, the favored individuals would include the poor in spirit, the meek, the mourners, the seekers of righteousness, the pure in heart, the merciful, the peacemakers, and those who are persecuted for the sake of righteousness and for spreading the gospel. In addition to complete devotion to God, the core of Jesus message was a love and devotion to others. In fact, Jesus preached that in extending ourselves to the less fortunate in society, we are symbolically worshiping God.

### Islam {#islam}

The world s second largest religion, Islam, views itself as the ultimate expression of the monotheistic tradition that began when God spoke to Abraham. Muslims believe that Muhammad, who lived in the Arabian pennisula from 570 to 632 C.E., is the last and final prophet to receive the word of Allah (Allah is the Arabic word for God). Jesus is also viewed as a prophet, but Muslims believe that his message was corrupted by followers who insisted on his divinity. According to Islam, God revealed his messages to Muhammad through the angel Gabriel over the course of twenty- three years. These revelations constitute the text of the Qur an, the unchanged, untranslated word of God.

The Five Pillars spell out the way of Muslim life and its purposes:

*   The First Pillar is shahadah, **the profession of faith**. There is no God but Allah, and Muhammad is his Prophet. This is the foundation stone of Islam, incorporating both a monotheistic belief in God and the recognition that while Muhammad is not divine, he is the last and greatest prophet of God. Although Islam believes that there might be many names for God, it is a religion built on the firm conviction that there is only one God, and it is our responsibility to submit totally to God s will in every dimension of our lives.
*   The Second Pillar of Islam is salat, **the performance of a continual round of prayers**, a response to the natural yearning of the human heart to pour forth its love and gratitude toward its Creator. Regular prayer also keeps a Muslim s life in proper perspective, a reminder to submit to God s will as rightfully sovereign over his or her life. A Muslim should pray five times daily on rising, at noon, in midafternoon, after sunset, and before retiring.
*   The Third Pillar is zakat, **the yearly setting aside of a portion of one’s wealth for the benefit of others.** There are always those who possess more material things than others, and Islam tries to bring a balance to this situation by asking those who have much to help lift the burden of those who have less. In addition to the zakat, Muslims are encouraged to give alms to charities. The
*   Fourth Pillar is sawm, **the observance of Ramadan**, the holy month in the Arabian calendar. This was the period in which Muhammad received his initial commission as a prophet and ten years later made his historic flight from Mecca to Medina. To commemorate these two occasions, those who are physically able to fast during the entire month. From dawn to sunset, Muslims do not eat, drink, have sexual intercourse, or smoke. Fasting underscores humankind s depen- dence on God and, by experiencing what it is like to feel hunger and suffering, helps make us more compassionate.
*   The Fifth Pillar is hajj, **the pilgrimage to Mecca** where one performs a set of rites. Once in a lifetime a Muslim is expected, if physical and economic conditions per- mit, to make this journey to Mecca where God s ultimate revelation was first dis- closed. Here again, similar to fasting during Ramadan, the purpose is to heighten the pilgrim s devotion to God and to His revealed will.