# Why our sample sizes are too small {#why-our-sample-sizes-are-too-small}

Let’s say you want to hire a secretary (sorry: a PA). A hundred women have applied for the role, and you’re interviewing them one by one in random order. After each interview, you have to make a decision: will I hire or reject this candidate? No sleeping on it, no putting it off until you’ve seen all the applicants. The decision you make straight after the interview cannot be overridden. How do you proceed?

This question is known among mathematicians by a politically incorrect label: the secretary problem. Surprisingly, there is only one optimal solution. You should interview the first thirty-seven candidates and reject them all; meanwhile, however, you should be monitoring their quality. Then keep interviewing until you find someone who is better than the top applicant out of the previous thirty-seven. Hire her. You’ll be making an excellent decision. She may not be the very best of the hundred applicants, but she’s sure to be a solid choice. Every other approach has been shown to produce statistically worse results.

What is it about the number thirty-seven? Thirty-seven is 100 divided by the mathematical constant e (2.718). If you had only fifty applicants, you would turn down the first eighteen (50/e) then hire the first candidate who was better than anyone out of the previous eighteen.

The world is much bigger, richer and more diverse than we imagine, so try to take as many samples as you can while you’re still young. Your first years of adulthood aren’t about earning money or building a career. They’re about getting acquainted with the universe of possibility. Be extremely receptive. Taste whatever fate dishes up. Read widely, because novels and short stories are excellent simulations of life. Only as you age should you adapt your modus operandi and become highly selective. By then you’ll know what you like and what you don’t.