## Parenting is not only about the child {#parenting-is-not-only-about-the-child}

When we buy into the myth that parenting is about the child, we readily take credit for our wonderful parenting when our children match up to our expectations, whereas we just as readily place blame on them when they don’t meet our expectations.

To parent consciously is to turn this approach on its head. The focus shifts to the parent as the one who needs to be “raised.” In other words, we put ourselves under scrutiny, not our children.

As adults, and now parents ourselves, we find ourselves unexpectedly triggered by an experience with our own child. What’s happening is that pain from our past is being reactivated. Conscious parenting stresses how our children act as a mirror for what we can’t see about ourselves. They bring to the surface the pain we haven’t processed but that’s now causing us to react so strongly, and often irrationally, to their behavior. Unless we take seriously what they are showing us about how hurt we have been—and how we have never really faced up to this hurt—we will raise them to exhibit the same immature behavior that reflects our unresolved pain. This is the essence of the profound journey of parenting. Instead of trying to “fix” our children, we are asked to turn inward and examine what in our own psyche needs to be resolved.

“Your child is fine being ordinary. It’s your own sense of lack that needs them to be labeled extraordinary. They don’t have this need—your ego does.” Let your child be average. Most children feel they are on earth to live a life that matches up to their parents’ standards, in return for which they hope to receive their parents’ love.

Instead of seeing her as defiant, they now realized that she was defending herself. Just this small shift in perspective allowed them to work with her in a whole new way. Now they couldn’t just pin all the blame on her but instead had to ask themselves, “Why does our child feel the need to be so defensive? What can we do to help her?” As they examined their part, they were able to release her from the burden of being “the defiant one.”