## Emotions {#emotions}

Emotions vs. feelings:

The point is that what we perceive in the world and our judgments about these perceptions influence our emotional reactions. And conversely, our emotions have a dramatic influence on what we perceive and how we interpret it. And because our knowledge of the world begins with perceptions, values and emotions are a natural and inseparable part of this knowing process.

**Physiological feelings may accompany emotions, they are clearly not the same phenomenon. As Jaggar notes, feelings are episodic in the sense that they occur at a given moment in time, whereas emotions extend over time: For instance, we may assert truthfully that we are outraged by, proud of or saddened by certain events, even if at the moment we are neither agitated nor tearful. In addition, although people may be unaware of their emotional state angry, ambivalent, depressed they are (nearly) always aware of what they are feeling at any given moment in time. If emotions include but also transcend episodic feelings, what else are they? One perspective the cognitivist point of view sees emotions as involving intentional judgments as well as physiological sensations. So, for example, you may be feeling anxious or agitated but is the emotion involved related to concern about an upcoming exam or concern about an upcoming romantic date? In other words, an important component in emotions is the intentional judgment that is associated with the physiological feeling. We may conclude, for instance, that it is our (intentional) evaluation of an upcoming date that is responsible for the anxiety ( butterflies ) we are feeling. Yet as important as intentional judgments are for understanding the nature of emotions, we still have not fully accounted for the complex nature of emotional experience.**

**In addition to immediate feelings and intentional judgments, emotions are also constituted by the social context in which they occur. For example, individuals in each culture are taught the appropriate emotional responses to people (strangers, authorities, religious figures, romantic interests) as well as situations (competitive sports, academic achievement, perceived insults). Each culture has its own unique emotional vocabulary that members of the culture learn at an early age, and this emotional vocabulary is an essential component in what emotions are all about. This vocabulary is expressed in the concepts and language of the culture, as well as in the actions and attitudes of the members. Jaggar s example of the emotion romantic love is pertinent here. Although there is general agreement regarding what this emotional concept means, each culture also tends to define the emotion and its affiliated attitudes and behavior in ways that are distinctive to that culture. The net result is that these social influences are integral elements in the construction of human emotions: hence the notion of emotions as social constructs.**